     SYNTHESIS OF KEY POINTS FROM THE  

OSEP EARLY CHILDHOOD TRANSITION FAQ  

(SPP/APR INDICATORS C-8, B-11 AND B-12) 

 

July 2010 

 

This document is a synthesis of the key points provided in the OSEP Early Childhood Transition 
FAQs:  SPP/APR indicators C-8 and B-12 released on December 1, 2009.  It was developed to 
assist states with the implementation of effective transition policies and practices.  The OSEP 

Early Childhood Transition FAQs:  SPP/APR indicators C-8 and B-12 can be accessed at: 

 http://spp-apr-calendar.rrfcnetwork.org/explorer/view/id/798 

 

 
 

 

A STATE MUST USE POLICIES AND PROCEDURES TO ENSURE A SMOOTH TRANSITION FOR TODDLERS RECEIVING 
EARLY INTERVENTION SERVICES UNDER PART C OF IDEA TO PRESCHOOL, OTHER APPROPRIATE SERVICES, OR 
EXITING THE PROGRAM.  (IDEA SECTION 637(a)(9)(A)) 

 
TRANSITION PLAN (C-8A) 

 

  A transition plan, that includes steps to exit from the program and appropriate services, is required to 
be developed after the toddler turns two and  before the child’s 3rd birthday and is a part of the IFSP. 

  The IFSP team, which includes the parent, is responsible for developing the transition plan. 

  The lead agency may develop the transition plan in the IFSP at the transition conference. 

  The team must review program options for the toddler with a disability who is potentially eligible for 

Part B for the period from that child’s third birthday through the remainder of the school year. 

 
LEA NOTIFICATION FROM PART C (C-8B) 
General Information about LEA Notification: 

 

 

  Content of the LEA Notification must include information to assist Part B in their child find 

responsibilities: 

Must include: 

o  Child’s name. 
o  Child’s date of birth.  
o  Parent contact information (including names, addresses and telephone numbers).  

 May additionally include: 

o  Service coordinator’s name and contact information.  
o  The language(s) spoken by the child and family. 

  

  The LEA Notification must be provided to the LEA where the toddler with a disability resides.  

  The State determines the method to be used for LEA Notification (e.g, electronically or hard copy 

directly to LEA or to SEA to be forwarded to LEA). 

1 

 

 
 

 

Two Steps of LEA Notification (can be separate or combined): 

 

  Step 1: Notification of children “shortly reaching the age of eligibility” – [as required by IDEA 

section 637(a)(9)(A)(ii)(I)) 

o  Notification is required for all children who will shortly reach the age of three (not reported in 

C-8B). 

o  Parental consent cannot be required. Parents can choose to opt-out of the notification only if 

the state has an OSEP approved opt-out policy. 

o  This is not considered to be a referral. 
o  There are options for how Part C handles Step 1 Notification  

  Decision made according to state context, data capacity, and relationship between 

Part C and Part B. 

  May occur on individual child basis or as a list of multiple children. 

o  No action needs to be taken by Part B.  
o  For some children, Part B may not be invited to the Transition Conference if the child is not 

potentially eligible.  

 

  Step 2:  Notification of children deemed potentially eligible – required for the APR under  

Indicator C-8B 

o  Part C Lead Agency must define potentially eligible (or develop a process for determining it). 
o 

In establishing its policy regarding potentially eligible for Part B, the Lead Agency should 
review, ideally in collaboration with the SEA, the Part B eligibility definitions including the 
state’s definition of developmental delay. 

o  The determination of whether a toddler is potentially eligible for Part B is made by the child’s 

IFSP team. 

o  This step of notification is usually provided on a subset of children depending on state’s 

definition of potentially eligible (reported in C-8B); thus, in some instances the LEA Notification 
may be sent for all Part C children (in such examples as eligibility definition for both programs 
are aligned and very similar or Part C eligibility is more narrow and restrictive than the Part B 
eligibility). 

o  Parental consent cannot be required; however, parents can choose to opt-out of the 

notification if the state has an OSEP approved opt-out policy (see below). 

o  This is considered to be an initial referral to Part B.  Therefore, Part B is required to complete 

the following actions (Part B regulation §300.504(a)(1)): 

  Send procedural safeguards to the child’s parents.  
  With parent approval, attend the transition conference which is initiated by Part C.  

(Note:  Approval is an affirmative response that may be given orally.) 

o  Sending the procedural safeguards to the family does not initiate the Part B timeline for initial 

evaluation. The timeline starts when parental consent for initial evaluation is obtained. 

 

  Combining Step 1 and Step 2  –  Notification steps can be combined (report only potentially eligible 

in C-8B) 

o  Those children who are potentially eligible can be indicated in the Step 1 Notification. 
o  The invitation to the LEA representative to the transition conference for those children 

potentially eligible for Part B can serve as the LEA Notification of potentially eligible children. 

2 

 

 
 

Opt-Out Policy 

 

If a state has an OSEP approved opt-out policy in place, the state may require parents be provided 
notice, prior to making LEA Notification, of the intended disclosure and allow the parent a specified 
time period to object to the disclosure and thus, prevent the LEA Notification from occurring.  

  A State’s opt-out policy must clarify the following:   

o  Parental consent can not be required for the lead agency to notify the LEA where the child 

resides and that such LEA Notification will occur in the absence of an objection by the parent.  
o  The LEA Notification includes the following “child find information,” namely the child's name, 

birth date, and parent contact information (including parents’ name(s), address(es) and 
telephone number(s)). 

o  The amount of time parents are provided to opt out.  
o  How parents may opt out (i.e., orally or in writing).  
o  When parents are informed of the opportunity to opt out of LEA Notification (how the lead 

agency will inform parents of LEA Notification and the State’s opt-out policy including any 
written materials or notice information; the content of this notice/information must include a 
description of all of the foregoing elements).   

 

 

 

  States do not report potentially eligible children whose parents have opted out of the LEA Notification 

in either the numerator or denominator in C-8B. 

 
TRANSITION CONFERENCE FOR CHILDREN POTENTIALLY ELIGIBLE UNDER  
PART B (C-8C) 
 

  Part C must invite the LEA representative to the transition conference if child is potentially eligible for 

Part B and the parent approves.  

 

 

  The LEA is required to participate in the transition conference. 

  Whether or not the LEA participates in the transition conference, the following must occur: 

o  Conduct the transition conference at least 90 days (and at the discretion of all parties, nine 

months) prior to the child’s third birthday. 

o  Develop or revise the transition plan in the IFSP (including identifying appropriate transition 

steps and services) at the conference. 

o  Provide parents at the conference with information about Part B preschool services  including: 

  A description of the Part B eligibility definitions. 
  State timelines and process for consenting to an evaluation and conducting eligibility 

determinations under Part B.  

  The availability of special education and related services.  

 

 

 

 
 

If the parent does not provide approval to conduct the transition conference, Part C must still provide 
LEA Notification for these children unless the state has an OSEP approved Opt-Out policy and the 
parent has opted out. 

3 

LATE REFERRAL TO PART C (C-8, B-11 AND B-12) 

 
Part C Responsibilities (C-8): 
  For a child  referred to Part C fewer than 45 days prior to the child’s third birthday,   Part C may, but is 

not required to: 

o  Conduct an initial evaluation and assessment. 
o  Conduct an initial IFSP meeting, if eligible. 
o  Develop a transition plan for such children (do not report these children in the calculation in C-

8A.  

o  Provide LEA Notification (do not report these children in calculation in C-8B). 

 

 

 

 

 
 

  For a child referred to Part C between 45 and 90 days prior to the child’s third birthday,  Part C  must: 

o  Conduct the initial evaluation, assessment. 
o  Conduct the initial IFSP meeting (if eligible).  
o 

If eligible and receiving services under Part C (which includes service coordination services), 
develop a transition plan (with the appropriate transition steps and services). 

o  Provide LEA Notification for that child and for children potentially eligible for Part B and report 

on such children under SPP/APR Indicator C-8B. 

  For a child referred to Part C less than 90 days prior to the child’s third birthday, Part C may, but is not 

required to: 

o  Conduct a transition conference with the LEA representative (not required to report data on 

these children in C-8C). 

o  Assist the family in contacting the LEA or provide the contact information for the family in case 

they wish to pursue eligibility for Part B. 

Part B Responsibilities (B-11 & B-12): 

  For a child who has been served in Part C and referred to Part B, but was referred to Part C less than 90 

days before the child’s third birthday, Part B: 

o  Must conduct an initial evaluation under Part B within 60 days of receiving parental consent 
for the evaluation or within the State established timeline, even if that timeline expires after 
the child’s third birthday.  

o  Does include the child under B-11 due to the initial evaluation requirement. 
o  Must hold a meeting to develop an IEP within 30 days of a determination that the child needs 

special education and related services. 

o  Must include the child in B-12(a) when reporting under Indicator B-12.  However, even if an 

evaluation under Part B to determine eligibility is conducted, and if appropriate, an IEP is 
developed and implemented by the child’s third birthday, the child must be factored out of the 
equation and reported in B-12(e). 

o  Must include in measurement B-12e all children served in Part C and referred to Part B who 

were referred to Part C less than 90 days before their third birthdays even if the LEA has 
determined the child to be not eligible or found the child eligible and had an IEP developed 
and implemented by the child’s third birthday.  All children reported in measurement B-12e 
must be subtracted from measurement B-12a when calculating the percentage of children 
who have an IEP developed and implemented by their third birthdays.  

o  States will be required to include measurement B-12e in the FFY 2009 APR submission due 

February 1, 2011. 

4 

 
LATE REFERRALS FROM PART C TO PART B (B-11 AND B-12) 
 

  For a child served in Part C who was referred to Part C more than 90 days before the child’s third 

birthday, but referred to Part B less than 90 days before the child’s third birthday, the LEA is 
responsible for: 

o  Ensuring that an initial evaluation under Part B is completed.  

o 

If the child is determined eligible under Part B, an IEP is developed and implemented by the 
child’s third birthday, even if the State-established timeline for conducting an initial evaluation 
expires after the child’s third birthday.   

o  Reporting this child in the SPP/APR Indicator B-12a, even if the child was referred to Part B less 

o 

o 

o 

than 90 days before the child’s third birthday.   
If the child was determined to be not eligible or found eligible and had an IEP developed and 
implemented by the child’s third birthday, the child must in addition be included in B-12b or B-
12c.   
If parental refusal to provide consent caused a delay in the evaluation or initial services, the 
child must be included in B-12d.     
If a late referral to Part B results in the LEA determining eligibility, and if appropriate, 
developing and implementing an IEP after the child’s third birthday, the State must include this 
child in measurement B-12a, but not in B-12b, c, d or e, and indicate that the reason for the 
delay was late referral from Part C to Part B, in addition to indicating the range of days beyond 
the third birthday when eligibility was determined and the IEP developed. 

 
PART B INITIAL EVALUATION AND ELIGIBILITY DETERMINATION (B-11) 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

  Part C assessments and parent information may be used to determine child eligibility for Part B: 

o  The IEP team and other qualified individuals must review existing evaluation data, including 

evaluations and information provided by the parents. 

o  Based on that review and input by the family, the team determines what additional data are 

needed to determine if child is a child with a disability. 

  Children who are served in Part C and transition to Part B should be reported in both B-11 and B-12. 

  A child who has been served in Part C that enrolls in another LEA after the child has been referred to 

Part B but before the child is evaluated to determine eligibility for Part B services can be excluded from 
SPP/APR Indicators B-11 and B-12.  The child can be excluded only if the subsequent public agency is 
making sufficient progress to ensure a prompt completion of the evaluation, and the parent and 
subsequent public agency agree to a specific time when the evaluation will be completed.    

5 

IEP DEVELOPED AND IMPLEMENTED BY 3RD BIRTHDAY FOR CHILDREN REFERRED 
BY PART C (B-12)  
 

  Referral to Part B for the purpose of reporting in B-12a occurs when the LEA has been notified that a 

child who is served in Part C is potentially eligible for services under Part B.  The following children 
must be reported in 12a: 

o  Children for whom the LEA has received LEA Notification prior to the child’s third birthday that 

the child will shortly reach the age of eligibility for Part B services and that the child is 
potentially eligible for services under Part B.  

o  Children for whom the LEA has received an invitation to the transition conference.   
o  Children served in Part C and referred to Part B even if child was referred to Part C less than 90 

days before the child’s 3rd birthday.  (These children will be subtracted out per measurement 
B-12e when calculating the percentage of children who have an IEP developed and 
implemented by their third birthdays.  This is true even if there has not been a transition 
conference at least 90 days before the third birthday and even if there has been an evaluation 
but an IFSP has not been developed).   

 

 
 

 
 

  Children not included in B-12 are those who have not been evaluated or determined eligible for Part C 

and therefore have not received any services.  (However, these children should be included in B-11.) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Developed by members of the Program Priority Team on Early Childhood Transition  

(NECTAC, RRCP and DAC) in collaboration with OSEP 

Diefendorf, M., Henson, J., Lucas, A., Whaley, K. 

 

 
 
 

                                                         

 

6 

The National Early ChildhoodTechnicalAssistance Center