 

Psicológica (2013), 34, 313-326. 

 

Presentation format and syllogistic reasoning  

Orlando Espino* and Carlos Santamaría 

Universidad de La Laguna (Spain) 

 

Figural  effect  is  a  response  bias  that  depends  on  the  arrangement  of  the 
terms  in  syllogisms.  The  usual  pattern  in  construction  tasks  is  that 
participants tend to give A-C responses when the syllogisms are in figure 
4(A-B/B-C),  while  the  majority  of  their  conclusions  are  in  the  opposite 
direction  (C-A)  for  syllogisms  in  figure  1  (B-A/C-B).  We  report  on  one 
experiment  that  examines  the  role  of  the  presentation  format  of  premises 
(two-line  presentation  vs.  one-line  presentation)  in  categorical  syllogisms. 
The  experiment  showed  that  when  premises  were  presented  in  one-line 
presentation format, participants generated more A-C than C-A conclusions 
in all syllogistic figures. However, when premises were presented in two-
line  presentation  format,  participants  generated  more  A-C  conclusions  in 
figure 4 and more C-A conclusions in figure 1, while there were no reliable 
differences for either figure 2 (A-B/C-B) or figure 3(B-A/B-C). We discuss 
the implications of these results for different theories of reasoning.  
 
 
Logic problems are often presented in a format not commonly used in 
ordinary language, with a separate line being employed for each proposition 
or  premise.  This  format  might  lead  reasoners  to  take  each  premise  as  a 
separate source of information and might therefore affect the way they draw 
conclusions. The aim of the present research is to examine whether certain 
reasoning effects could have been influenced by the practice of using such 
an atypical presentation format. Current reasoning theories acknowledge the 
particular  relevance  of  superficial  factors  (Evans,  2003;  Johnson-Laird, 
                                                 
* Acknowledgements: This research was supported by the Spanish Ministry for Science and 
Innovation with grant no. PSI2011-26386. We are thankful to Phil Johnson-Laird and an 
anonymous  reviewer  for  their  helpful  comments  to  a  previous  draft  of  this  paper. 
Correspondence  should  be  addressed  to  Orlando  Espino.  Departamento  de  Psicología 
Cognitiva,  Social  y  Organizacional.  Facultad  de  Psicología.  Universidad  de  la  Laguna. 
Campus de Guajara. 38205 Tenerife (Spain). Fax 34 922317461. Phone 34 922317505.    
E-mail: oespinom@ull.es 
 

 

314 
 

O. Espino & C. Santamaría 

2006;  Kahneman,  2011;  Stanovich,  1999).  However,  there  has  been  no 
study conducted to date exploring the effect that this traditional separation 
of the declarative sentences known as premises may have on the reasoning 
process.  In  this  paper,  we  will  present  a  direct  comparison  between  this 
traditional  presentation  format  (two-line  presentation)  and  one-line 
presentation. In particular, we will investigate how the presentation format 
(two-line  presentation  versus  one-line  presentation)  affects  the  reasoning 
process and the figural effect in syllogistic problems.   

Syllogisms are arguments with two premises leading to a conclusion. 

For example: 

 
  premise 1 :    All of the A are B 
  premise 2 :    All of the B are C 
  -------------------------------------- 
  conclusion:  All of the A are C 
 
Both premises and conclusion are statements that use quantifiers of 

one of four types or moods:  

 
  - All A are B    
  - Some A are B  
  - No A are B   
  - Some A are not B 
 

(A) 
(I) 
(E) 
(O) 

where the letters in parentheses are the traditional abbreviations for each 
kind of proposition.  Each statement in the premises contains two terms: one 
(the middle term B), occurs in both premises, while the other two (A and C) 
are  the  end  terms.  The  arrangement  of  the  middle  terms  in  each  of  the 
premises of a syllogism gives rise to a four-way classification, known as the 
figures of the syllogism: 

 
Figure 1  
 
B – A 
C – B 
 
 

Figure 2 
A – B   
C – B   

Figure 3 
B – A   
B – C   

Figure 4 
A - B 
B - C 

Presentation format and syllogistic reasoning  

315 

 

to  generate 

Early  studies  showed  that  these  figures  generate  different  levels  of 
difficulty (Dickstein, 1978; Fraser, 1968; Pezzoli & Fraser, 1968; Roberge, 
1970). In some of these studies, it was found that syllogisms in figure 4 
were more difficult to resolve than those in figure 1, while figures 2 and 3 
had an intermediate difficulty (Dickstein, 1978). This author proposed that 
figure  4  was  the  most  difficult,  because  people  have  to  process  the 
information  backward,  while  in  figure  1  syllogisms,  they  process  the 
information forward. In figures 2 and 3, they can process both forward and 
backward. However, the reason why people had more difficulty with figure 
4  than  with  figure  1  was  that  the  conclusion  was  framed  according  to 
Scholastic logic: subject-predicate (with the subject being the end term of 
the  second  premise  and  the  predicate  the  end  term  of  the  first  premise). 
However,  when  participants  were  allowed 
their  own 
conclusions, it was found that in figure 4 syllogisms, there was a preference 
to  build  A-C  conclusions,  while  in  figure  1  syllogisms,  there  was  a 
preference  to  build  C-A  conclusions  (Johnson-Laird  &  Steedman,  1978, 
experiment  2).  Also,  it  was  found  that  when  the  syllogism  had  a  valid 
conclusion in one direction but not the other (experiment 2), participants 
found  the  syllogisms  in  which  the  valid  conclusion  coincided  with  the 
figure (for example, an A-C conclusion in a figure 4 syllogism) easier to 
resolve  than  when  the  conclusion  did  not  coincide  with  the  figure  (for 
example, a C-A conclusion in a figure 4 syllogism). These results have been 
replicated in a later study (Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984). There, the authors 
found  (experiment  3)  that  in  figure  1  there  was  a  preference  to  build 
conclusions  in  the  order  C-A  (63%),  while  in  figure  4  there  was  a 
preference to build conclusions in the order A-C (78%). These results led 
Johnson-Laird to introduce the Mental Model theory to explain the figural 
effect  (Johnson-Laird,  1983).  However,  other  authors  offer  different 
explanations  for  the  figural  effect  (Chater  &  Oaksford  1999;  Dickstein, 
1978; Ford, 1995; Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984; Oberauer & Wilhelm, 2000; 
Oberauer,  Hörnig,  Weidenfeld  &  Wilhelm,  2005;  Polk  &  Newell,  1995; 
Stenning  &  Oberlander,  1995;  Stenning  &  Yule,  1997;  Wetherick  & 
Gilhooly, 1990).  

  Wetherick  &  Gilhooly  (1990)  argue  that  the  figural  effect  arises 
from  the  tendency  to  use  a  term  that  has  appeared  as  the  grammatical 
subject of one of the premises as the first term in the conclusion. In figure 4 
(A-B/B-C), “A” is the subject of the first premise, so the preferred order of 
the end terms in the conclusion will be: A-C. In figure 1 (B-A/C-B), “C” is 
the subject of the second premise, so C-A will be more frequent.  

 

316 
 

O. Espino & C. Santamaría 

Chater  &  Oaksford  (1999)  proposed  a  Probability  Heuristic  Model 
(PHM) to explain the figural effect. The most relevant heuristics in PHM to 
explain  the  “response  bias”  are  the  min-heuristic  and  the  attachment-
heuristic. The min-heuristic chooses the quantifier of the conclusion to be 
same as the quantifier in the least informative premise (the min-premise). 
The  attachment-heuristic  fixes  conclusion  order  using  the  following 
procedure: if the min-premise has an end term as its subject, use this as the 
subject of the conclusion. Otherwise, use the end term of the max-premise 
as the subject of the conclusion. PHM predicts that the conclusion order is 
determined by the conclusion type. In other words, “the order of the end 
term is decided after conclusion type is selected” (Chater & Oaksford, 1999, 
p. 212).  

Ford (1995) has proposed that some individuals (verbal reasoners) use 
set-theoretic principles, whereas others (spatial reasoners) use Euler circles 
when solving syllogisms. She found that in both groups, there was an effect 
of the figure in figure 1 and figure 4 syllogisms. Her conclusions for the 
spatial  reasoner  were  that  “more  work  needs  to  be  carried  out  to  reveal 
subtle  factors  affecting  the  order  of  terms  in  conclusions”  (Ford,  1995, 
p.69). However, her predictions are more precise for the verbal reasoner.  
She argues that the participants manipulate the verbal form of the syllogism 
as an algebraic problem, by taking one premise as having a term that needs 
to be substituted with another term, and the other premise as providing a 
value  for  that  substitution.  The  premise  that  provides  the  values  for 
substitution acts as a rule relating membership of class ‘C’ to a property ‘P’, 
while the premise containing the term that needs to be substituted acts as a 
case of specific objects, ‘O’, whose status with regard to either ‘C’ or ‘P’ is 
known.  She  proposed  four  principles  that  are  supposed  to  govern 
substitutions (Ford, 1995, page. 21). In relation to the figural effect, Ford 
claimed  that  the  occurrence  of  a  position  effect  or  figural  effect  may  be 
dependent on which part of the principle is being applied. 

Oberauer  &  Wilhelm  (2000)  and  Oberauer  et.  al.  (2005)  have 
proposed  different  factors  to  explain  the  figural  effect  during  both  the 
integration  of  premises  and  the  inference  stage.  In  the  integration  of  the 
premises,  they  proposed  two  factors  to  explain  the  figural  effect:  the 
relatum (given principle) and the given-new principle. The relatum (given 
principle)  arises  from  the  directionality  between  relatum  (or  reference 
object) and target (target object) and the ensuing the order of construction 
of a mental model. In a sentence, the relatum is the reference object, while 
the term that is described relative to the relatum is the target object. For 
example,  in  the  sentence  “if  p,  then  q”,  “p”  is  the  reference  object  or 
relatum  and  “q”  is  the  term  that  is  relative  to  it.  Oberauer  et  al.  (2005) 

 

postulated  that  people  prefer  to  build  the  mental  model  of  the  premises 
starting with the relatum term and add the target object to the relatum. In 
others words, there is an inherent directionality in every sentence that goes 
from the relatum object to the target object. The second factor is the given-
new  principle,  according  to  which  the  assignment  of  an  anaphoric 
expression to its antecedent is easier when the anaphor is mentioned before 
a new term. Also, Oberauer et al. (2000, 2005) have proposed two factors to 
explain the directional effect during the inference stage. The first factor is 
the inherent directionality of the relation between the target object and the 
relatum, which is preserved in the integrated mental model if, and only if, it 
is needed to preserve a semantic asymmetry. The other factor is a recency 
effect of working memory (Espino, Santamaría & García Madruga, 2000a). 
These  authors  have  found  that  participants  attempt  to  attach  incoming 
information  to  the  last  element  of  the  model.  Recently,  proponents  of 
Mental Model theory have claimed that the definitive account of the figural 
effect ‘is a semantic one due to Oberauer and his colleagues’ (Khemlani & 
Johnson-Laird, 2012, page 431). 

  The anterior explanation of Mental Model theory (Johnson-Laird & 
Bara,  1984;  Johnson-Laird  &  Byrne,  1991)  of  the  figural  effect  was  the 
‘FIFO  principle’.  In  this  paper,  we  adopt  this  hypothesis  to  explain  our 
results.  It  provides  an  explanation  of  the  figural  effect  based  on  two 
assumptions.  First,  the  account  proposes  that  in  order  to  construct  an 
integrated  model  of  the  two  premises,  reasoners  attempt  to  bring  middle 
terms (Bs) together. Second, it proposes that the way to state a conclusion is 
based  on  the  principle  “first  in,  first  out”  (henceforth,  FIFO;  Broadbent, 
1958): the first piece of information entering the integrated model of the 
premises will be the first element in the conclusion. If the two middle terms 
of the premises occur in sequence (for example, the syllogism A-B/B-C), 
then the Mental Model theory proposes that the two premises can be easily 
combined to form an integrated model. In the syllogism A-B/B-C (figure 4), 
the first term in the integrated model is “A” and consequently, by the FIFO 
principle,  the  most  frequent  conclusion  will  be  in  the  direction  A-C. 
However, if the middle terms are not in sequence, additional operations will 
be  necessary  in  order  to  bring  together  the  middle  terms.  According  to 
Johnson-Laird & Bara (1984), when the middle terms are not in sequence 
(as in figure 1: B-A/C-B), reasoners could use two different procedures to 
build the integrated mental model of the premises. First, the order of the 
terms within the first premise (B-A) and the second premise (C-B) could be 
switched round. For example, if the interpretation of “All A is B” is switched 
round, then it takes the form: 

Presentation format and syllogistic reasoning  

317 

 

318 
 

O. Espino & C. Santamaría 

[a] 
[a] 

B 
B 
   … 

   
   
   
 
Johnson-Laird  (1983)  affirms  that  “switching  round  an  interpretation 
must not be confused with the operation of converting a premise, …, the idea 
of switching round an interpretation concerns only the order of the information 
in working memory” (page 107). Switching round the terms in both premises 
in figure 1 brings the two middle terms together (A-B/B-C). Once the terms of 
the premises are in sequence, reasoners would select the conclusion, and the 
FIFO principle would determine the direction. As “A” is the first end term in 
the integrated model, it fills the first position in the conclusion.   

The second strategy to build the integrated model consists in reversing 
(renewing) the order of the two models of the two premises. The way to 
proceed is to construct a model of the second premise (C-B) and then add 
the information from the first premise (B-A). Now the middle terms are in 
sequence (C-B/B-A) and the reasoner can build an integrated model. Once 
the  terms  of  premises  are  in  sequence,  reasoners  would  select  the 
conclusion, and the FIFO principle would determine the direction. As “C” is 
the first end term in the integrated model, it fills the first position in the 
conclusion.  

It is not clear what mechanism might lead reasoners to choose one or 
the  other  strategy.  However,  this  selection  may  well  be  influenced  by 
superficial  factors.  Our  prediction  is  that,  in  order  to  built  the  integrated 
model, participants will prefer to switch round the terms of premises (first 
strategy) for one-line presentation, and to reverse (or renew) the order of the 
premises  (second  strategy)  for  two-line  presentation.  Our  prediction  is 
founded  in  the  idea  that  in  one-line  presentation,  the  placement  of  the 
premises prevents reasoners from treating them as separate units. In figure 4 
(A-B/B-C),  participants  do  not  need  to  use  any  strategy  to  build  the 
integrated model, because the middle terms are in sequence. However, for 
the remaining figures (figure 1, figure 2 and figure 3), if they want to build 
the integrated model, they have to use the first strategy in the first premise 
(figure 3), the second premise (figure 2) or both (figure 1). For example, in 
figure  1  (B-A/C-B)  participants  should  use  the  first  strategy  in  the  first 
premise (converting B-A in A-B) and in the second premise (converting C-
B  in  B-C).  The  consequence  of  using  the  first  strategy,  plus  the  FIFO 
strategy, in one-line presentation will be an increment of A-C conclusions 
in all figures as compared to two-line presentation. Also, we predict that in 

Presentation format and syllogistic reasoning  

319 

 

one-line  presentation,  participants  will  produce  more  A-C  than  C-A 
conclusions in all figures. 

When  the  format  used  is  two-line  presentation,  we  predict  that 
participants will prefer to renew or reverse the order of premises (second 
strategy) as their first strategy and they will only switch round the terms of 
the premises (first strategy) as a secondary or complementary strategy. In 
figure 4 (A-B/B-C), participants do not need to use any strategy to built the 
integrated model, because the middle terms are in sequence. In this case, we 
predict that participants will produce more A-C than C-A conclusions. In 
figure 1 syllogisms (B-A/C-B), the easier way to build the integrated model 
is by using mainly the second strategy (C-B/B-A). In this case, we predict 
for figure 1 that reasoners will produce less A-C conclusions in two-line 
presentation than in one-line presentation.  

In figure 2 and figure 3 (the symmetrical figures), there are two ways 
to  obtain  the  integrated  model.  One  procedure  starts  with  the  second 
strategy  (the  preferred  one),  after  which  the  first  strategy  needs  to  be 
applied to obtain the integrated model. In that case, according to the FIFO 
principle,  participants  will  produce  more  C-A  than  A-C  conclusions. 
However, there is a second way to obtain the integrated model:  using only 
the first strategy in figure 2 (in the second premise) and figure 3 (in the first 
premise).  In  this  case,  according  to  the  FIFO  principle,  participants  will 
produce more A-C than C-A conclusions. Because either procedure could 
be used to obtain the integrated model in the symmetric figures, we do not 
predict any differences for the direction of the answer (A-C versus C-A).  

EXPERIMENT 

Our main objective in this experiment was to study the influence of 
the presentation format in a syllogistic reasoning task. Two formats were 
used: two-line presentation and one-line presentation (for example, All of 
the A are B. All of the B are C). In relation to the presentation format, we 
have  postulated  that  when  the  premises  are  presented  on  a  single  line, 
participants  will  prefer  to  switch  round  the  terms  of  the  premises  (first 
strategy)  than  to  reverse  (or  renew)  the  order  of  the  premises  (second 
strategy), whereas when the premises are presented on two lines (separate 
premises),  participants  will  prefer  to  reverse  (or  renew)  the  order  of  the 
premises (second strategy) than to switch round the terms of the premises 
(first  strategy).  As  a  result,  we  predict  that  the  reasoners  should  present 
more A-C than C-A conclusions for the one-line presentation format. Also, 
we predict that in two-line presentation, reasoners should present more A-C 

320 
 

O. Espino & C. Santamaría 

than C-A conclusions in figure 4 and more C-A than A-C conclusions in 
figure 1. No difference is predicted for figures 2 and 3. 

METHOD 

Participants and design. A total of 78 students at the “Universidad 
de La Laguna” volunteered to participate. A mixed 2x4 design was used. 
The between-participant factor was the presentation format with two levels: 
one-line and two-line presentation. The second factor was the figure and 
had  the  four  levels  corresponding  to  the  four  figures.  The  dependent 
variable was the direction of responses (A-C or C-A).  

 
Materials and procedure. Each participant received a total of eight 
experimental  problems:  two  problems  for  each  figure.  The  experimental 
syllogisms used were: AI1, EA1, EA2, AE2, IA3, AI3, IA4, AE4. All were 
one-model problems with valid conclusions in both directions (see Johnson-
Laird and Byrne, 1991). In Table 1 we present an example of each type of 
presentation format and figure. 

Participants  were  tested  in  a  quiet  room  in  groups  of  eight  to  ten. 
Their task was to consider a series of problems, and to draw a conclusion 
for each of the problems that had to be true, given that the premises were 
true.  The  problems  were  presented  in  random  order  to  the  individual 
participants in the form of booklets. Two types of booklets were used. In 
one,  participants  received  the  premises  of  the  syllogisms  in  the  one-line 
presentation format. In the second, participants received the second premise 
below  the  first  premise  in  the  traditional  format  (two-line  presentation). 
There was no time limit set for performing the task. 

The  participants  wrote  down 

their  own  conclusions.  These 
conclusions were labelled A-C when the first term in the conclusion was the 
end term in the first premise, and C-A when the first term in the conclusion 
was the end term in the second premise.  

RESULTS 

Table 2 presents the percentages of valid and invalid conclusions in 
the A-C and C-A direction for each of the four figures and two presentation 
formats. Only those responses that included the middle term and one end 
term were eliminated (1%). We analysed the results for valid and invalid 
responses in an ANOVA carried out on the endorsements of inferences with 
the  following  factors:  figure  (figure  1,  figure  2,  figure  3  and  figure  4), 
direction of response (A-C versus C-A) and presentation format (one-line 

Presentation format and syllogistic reasoning  

321 

 

presentation versus two-line presentation), with repeated measures on the 
first two factors and the last acting as a between-participant variable. The 
Greenhouse-Geisser  correction  for  the  violation  of  sphericity  assumption 
was  used  in  this  analysis.  This  analysis  revealed  an  interaction  between 
direction of response and figure (F (3,228) = 5.51, Mse = .14, p < .001,    
2  =  .07)  but  not  between  figure  and  presentation  format  (F  (2.157, 
ηp
163.917) = .52, Mse = .00, p = .67, ηp
2 = .01). There was no main effect for 
the figure (F (2.157, 163.917) = 1.28, Mse = .00, p = .28, ηp
2 = .02). There 
were main effects for direction of response (F (1, 76) = 29.05, Mse = .31,    
p < .001,  ηp
2 = .28) and the interaction was reliable between direction of 
response and presentation format (F (1, 76) = 10.55, Mse = .31, p < .002, 
2 = .12). There were no effects for the triple interaction between figure, 
ηp
presentation format and direction of response (F (3, 228) = 1.54, Mse = .14, 
2  =  .12).  There  were  no  effects  for  the  between-participant 
p  =  .20,  ηp
2 = .00).  
variable (F (1, 76) = .15, Mse = .00, p = .70, ηp
in  one-line  presentation, 
that 
participants gave more A-C than C-A conclusions in figure 4 (76% versus 
23%; z= 3.94, p <  .001), figure 1 (66% versus 34%; z= 3.03, p < .003) 
figure 2 (67% versus 33%; z= 2.83, p <  .006) and figure 3 (68% versus 
31%;  z=  3.32,  p  <  .002).  A  further  analysis  showed  that  in  two-line 
presentation, participants gave more A-C than C-A conclusions in figure 4 
(66% versus 34%; z= 2.68, p < .006) but they gave more C-A than A-C 
conclusions in figure 1 (58% versus 40%; z=  1.93,  p = .053), although the 
differences were not reliable. No reliable differences were found between 
the percentage of A-C and C-A responses in figure 2 (59% versus 41%;    
z= 1.60, p = .10) and figure 3 (53% versus 45%; z= .99, p = .32).  

A  subsequent  analysis  showed 

DISCUSSION 

In this paper, we have reported a consistent result that is new in the 
psychology of reasoning. The classical figural effect can be reversed (figure 
1 in one-line presentation) by simply arranging the premises in a different 
way:  participants  generate  more  A-C  than  C-A  conclusions  in  figure  1 
syllogisms when a one-line presentation is used. Also, a new effect could be 
obtained  for  figure  2  and  figure  3  in  the  sense  that  participants  produce 
more A-C than C-A conclusions with this presentation format. It is worth 
mentioning  that  in  previous  studies  in  which  two-line  presentation  was 
used, no directionality effect was found for figures 2 and 3 (Johnson-Laird 
& Bara, 1984).  
 

322 
 

O. Espino & C. Santamaría 

Table 1. Examples of materials from Experiment 1. 

 
 

 

 

 

Presentation format and syllogistic reasoning  

323 

 

Table  2.  Percentages  of  valid  and  invalid  responses  A-C  and  C-A 
according  to  the  presentation  format  (one-line  presentation  and  two-
line presentation) and figure type (figure 1, figure 2, figure 3, figure 4). 
In parentheses, the percentages of correct responses. 

 

 
 
On the other hand, with the traditional presentation format (two-line 
presentation)  we  have  obtained  results  that  confirm  the  figural  bias:  in 
figure  1  syllogisms,  participants  gave  more  C-A  than  A-C  conclusions, 
while  in  figure  4  syllogisms,  participants  gave  more  A-C  than  C-A 
conclusions.  Consequently,  this  result  confirms  the  usual  findings  in  this 
field (Johnson-Laird & Bara, 1984; Ford, 1995; Polk & Newell, 1995). For 
example, Johnson-Laird & Bara (1984; Experiment 1, 60-sec. presentation 
condition), using the two-line format presentation, found that the accuracy 
of the performance for the same problems that we used in this experiments 
was 93%, while in our study it was 90% (Table 2).  
To  explain  this  new  pattern,  we  have  suggested  that  in  a  one-line 
presentation, participants are more prompted to use the ‘switching strategy’, 
because  they  see  the  premises  as  one  unit.  However,  in  two-line 
presentation, the two premises could be seen as separate units. In this case, 
we suggest that participants can use the two strategies: the ‘renew strategy’ 
and the ‘switching strategy’. They apply the ‘renew strategy’ when they see 
the premises as separate units and they apply the switching strategy when 
the ‘renew strategy’ cannot be used.  

324 
 

O. Espino & C. Santamaría 

This explanation is consistent with the FIFO explanation, because this 
point  of  view  claims  that  reasoners  can  use  two  different  strategies  to 
rearrange  the  elements  in  syllogisms  and  produce  conclusions.  This 
explanation points out that the position of the end terms in the conclusion is 
determined by their position in the integrated model. For example, if the 
participants reverse the order of the premises in figure 1 syllogisms, then 
‘C’ will be the first term in the integrated model and it will appear as the 
first term in the conclusion. Conversely, if they switch round the individual 
premises,  ‘A’  will  be  the  first  term  in  the  integrated  model  and  it  will 
initiate  the  conclusion.  According  to  the  FIFO  explanation,  it  could  be 
maintained that with one-line presentation, the participants gave priority to 
the  switching  round  strategy  within  premises  over  a  strategy  that  went 
between premises. It is reasonable to assume that the latter strategy is more 
difficult  to  envisage  and  perform  when  the  superficial  cues  of  premise 
position are not given. 

Other  theories  (Chater  &  Oaksford,  1999;  Ford,  1995:  Oberauer  & 
Wilhelm, 2000; Oberauer et. al, 2005; Polk & Newell, 1995; Wetherick & 
Gilhooly, 1990) cannot explain the order of the end terms in the conclusion 
when the syllogism is presented in one-line presentation. For the syntactic 
hypotheses (Wetherick & Gilhooly, 1990; Polk & Newell, 1995), the order 
of the terms in the conclusion is determined by the syntactic role that each 
term plays in the premises: if the end term is the subject of the premise, then 
reasoners use that term as the subject of the conclusion. As our variations of 
the presentation format did not affect the syntactic role of each end term, 
syntactic theories cannot explain our results, and this implies that the figural 
effect usually found in figure 1 (reproduced in our two-line presentation) 
remains unexplained from this point of view. The syntactic factors cannot 
be affected by the superficial placement of the premises. 

  The  Probabilistic-Heuristic  Model  (Chater  &  Oaksford,  1999) 
suggests  that  conclusion  order  is  determined  by  the  attachment-heuristic. 
The prediction of this model for figure 1 syllogisms is that participants will 
tend to draw conclusions in the direction “C-A”. Although this prediction 
could  explain  the  results  obtained  in  traditional  two-line  presentation,  it 
does not fit our one-line presentation results where participants constructed 
conclusions in the “A-C” direction. 

  Ford (1995) proposed an explanation of the figural effect in terms of 
set-theoretical principles. Once again, our manipulation of the presentation 
format should not affect the set-theoretical principles that could be applied, 
so this theory is unable to explain our results.  

Presentation format and syllogistic reasoning  

325 

 

Finally, Oberauer & Wilhelm (2000) and Oberauer et al. (2005) have 
proposed  an  explanation  of  the  figural  effect  during  the  inference  stage 
based on two factors: a)  

the inherent directionality of the relation between the target object and 
the relatum and b) the recency effect of working memory. However, our 
manipulation of the presentation format should affect (or not affect) both 
factors in the same way, so this theory is unable to explain the results we 
obtained when the one-line presentation is used.  

In  summary,  the  results  reported  in  this  paper,  taken  together  with 
other  recent  results  achieved  using  different  methodologies,  such  as 
measuring the activation of the end terms (Espino, Santamaría & García-
Madruga, 2000a), reading time of premises (Espino, Santamaría & García-
Madruga,  2000b)  or  eye-movement  monitoring  (Espino,  Santamaría, 
Meseguer & Carreiras, 2005), give a clear primacy to the FIFO explanation 
to account for the figural effect. 

RESUMEN 

Formato  de  presentación  y  razonamiento  silogístico.  El  efecto  de  la 
figura  es  un  sesgo  de  respuesta  que  depende  de  la  disposición  de  los 
términos  en  los  silogismos.  El  resultado  más  usual,  en  una  tarea  de 
construcción,  es  que  los  participantes  tienden  a  dar  la  respuesta  en  la 
dirección A-C cuando los silogismos son de la figura 4 (A-B/B-C), mientras 
que la mayoría de sus conclusiones son en la dirección opuesta (C-A) en la 
figura 1 (B-A/C-B). Presentamos un experimento que estudia el papel del 
tipo  de  formato  de  las  premisas  (presentación  en  dos  líneas  versus 
presentación  en  una  línea)  en  silogismos  categóricos.  Los  resultados 
obtenidos  muestran  que  cuando  la  presentación  de  las  premisas  fue  en  el 
formato de una línea, los participantes generaban más respuestas A-C que 
respuestas  C-A  en  todas  las  figuras  silogísticas.  Sin  embargo,  cuando  la 
presentación de las premisas fue en dos líneas, los participantes generaban 
más respuestas A-C en los silogismos de la figura 4 y más respuestas C-A en 
los  silogismos  de  la  figura  1,  pero  no  se  encontraron  diferencias 
significativas ni en los silogismos de la figura 2 (A-B/C-B) ni en los de la 
figura  3  (B-A/B-C).  En  este  artículo  discutimos  las  implicaciones  de  los 
resultados para las distintas teorías de razonamiento. 

REFERENCES 

Broadbent, D. (1958). Perception and communication. New York: Pergamon Press. 
Chater,  N.  &  Oaksford,  M.  (1999).  The  probability  heuristics  model  of  syllogistic 
Dickstein,  L.  S.  (1978).  The  effect  of  figure  on  syllogistic  reasoning.  Memory  and 

reasoning. Cognitive Psychology , 38, 191-258. 
Cognition, 6, 76-83.  

326 
 

O. Espino & C. Santamaría 

syllogistic reasoning. Thinking and Reasoning, 6, 67-89.  
syllogistic reasoning. Current Psychology of Cognition, 19, 417-428. 
in syllogistic reasoning: evidence from eye-movements. Cognition, 98, B1-B9. 
Cognitive Sciences, 7, 454-9,  
reasoning. Cognition, 54, 1-71.  
Psychology, 76, 407-412. 
Press. 

Espino, O., Santamaría, C. & García-Madruga, J.A. (2000a). Activation of end-terms in 
Espino,  O.,  Santamaría,  C.  &  García-Madruga,  J.A.  (2000b).  Figure  and  difficulty  in 
Espino, O., Santamaría, C., Meseguer, E., & Carreiras, M. (2005). Early and late processes 
Evans,  St.  B.  T  (2003).  In  two  minds:  Dual  process  accounts  of  reasoning.  Trend  in 
Ford, M. (1995). Two modes of mental representation and problem solution in syllogistic 
Fraser, L. T. (1968). Associative factors in syllogistic reasoning. Journal of Experimental 
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (1983). Mental models. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Johnson-Laird, P. N. (2006). How we reason. Oxford, University Press; 
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Bara, B. G. (1984). Syllogistic Inference. Cognition, 16, 1-62. 
Johnson-Laird, P. N., & Byrne, R. M. J. (1991). Deduction. Hillsdale, New Jersey: LEA. 
Johnson-Laird,  P.  N.,  &  Steedman,  M.  (1978).  The  psychology  of  the  syllogisms. 
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, fast and slow. Penguin books, England. 

Cognitive Psychology, 10, 64-98. 

Khemlani, S., & Johnson-­‐Laird, P.N. (2012). Theories of the syllogism: A meta-analysis. 

Psychological Bulletin, 138, 427-­‐457. 

Oberauer, K. , Hörnig, R., Weidenfeld, A. & Wilhelm, O. (2005). Effects of directionality in 
deductive reasoning: II. Premise integration and conclusion evaluation. The Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 58A (7), 1225-1247. 
Oberauer, K., & Wilhelm, O. (2000). Effects of directionality in deductive reasoning: I. The 
comprehension of a single relational premises. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory and Cognition, 26, 1702-1712. 
Pezzoli, J. F. & Fraser, L. T. (1968). Mediated facilitation of syllogistic reasoning. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology, 78, 228-232. 
Polk, T. A., & Newell, A. (1995). Deduction as verbal reasoning. Psychological Review, 
102, 533-566.  
Roberge, J.J. (1970). A reexamination of the interpretations of error in formal syllogistic 
reasoning. Psychonomic Science, 10, 331-333. 
Stanovich, K. E. (1999). Who is rational? Studies of individual differences in reasoning. 
Lawrence Elrbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ.,  
Stenning,  K.  &  Oberlander,J.  (1995).  A  cognitive  theory  of  graphical  and  linguistic 
reasoning: logic and implementation. Cognitive Science, 19, 97-140. 
Stenning,  K.  &  Yule,  P.  (1997).  Image  and  language  in  human  reasoning:  a  syllogistic 
illustration. Cognitive Psychology, 34, 109-159.  
Wetherick, N., & Gilhooly, K. (1990). Syllogistic reasoning: effects of premise order. In 
K.Gilhooly, M. T. G. Keane, R. Logie, & G. Erdos, Lines of thought: Reflections on 
the psychology of thinking, Vol. 1, London: Wiley. 

 
 

 

(Manuscript  received: 15 November 2012; accepted: 28 January 2012) 

