International Education Studies; Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 
ISSN 1913-9020 E-ISSN 1913-9039 
Published by Canadian Center of Science and Education 
The Evolution of Iranian French Learners’ Spoken Interlanguage from 

a Cognitive Point of View 

Marzieh Mehrabi1, Rouhollah Rahmatian1, Parivash Safa1 & Novid Armiun1 

1 French Department, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran 
Correspondence:  Rouhollah  Rahmatian,  French  Department,  Tarbiat  Modares  University,  Tehran,  Iran.  Tel: 
98-21-8288-4648. E-mail: rahmatir@modares.ac.ir 
 
Received: March 13, 2014      Accepted: April 18, 2014      Online Published: May 28, 2014 
doi:10.5539/ies.v7n6p117                        URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/ies.v7n6p117 
 
Abstract 
This paper analyzes the spoken corpus of thirty Iranian learners of French at four levels (A1, A2, B1 and B2). 
The data were collected in a pseudo-longitudinal manner in semi-directed interviews with half closed and open 
questions to analyze the learners’ syntactic errors (omission, addition, substitution and displacement). The most 
frequent  errors  from  A1  to  B2  levels  were  determined  and  categorized,  which  allowed  further  analysis.  The 
results show although some persistent errors are problematic at all levels, their form changes from one level to 
another. At A1 and A2 levels, the definite articles were missed before nouns, at B1 and B2, they were set aside in 
the second word of noun groups. In addition, at A1 and A2 levels errors are more of an interlingual nature while 
at  B1  and  B2  levels  they  are  mostly  intralingual.  At  elementary  levels,  learners  deal  with  proactive  transfers 
whereas in more advanced levels retroactive transfers and overextensions come into play. 
Keywords: oral production, interlanguage, syntactic errors, Iranian learners of French 
1. Introduction 
Much  of  classroom  exchange  is  through  oral  expression.  According  to  Lafontaine  (2002-2003),  it  has  been 
shown  that  the  spoken  language  contributes  to  the  cognitive  development  of  learners.  In  cognitive  didactics, 
classroom exchanges contribute effectively not only to the construction of knowledge but also and in particular 
to  shaping  up  interpersonal  relations  of  the  learners.  The  spoken  language,  apart  from  being  a  means  of 
communication, is what allows communities to emerge.   
In the past few years, speaking has received priority in the Iranian language classroom for a number of reasons: 
learning to speak, immigrating abroad, finding better job opportunities, getting a promotion at work, improving 
their speaking ability, etc. This led us to undertake the present research on cognitive didactics of oral expression. 
We part from the issue of how knowledge is organized when we speak. In this regard, we will focus on the way 
in which the oral interlanguage of Iranian learners develops from a syntactical point of view. In this paper, we 
will attempt to clarify how the interlanguage of Iranian learners evolves and which cognitive operations are most 
frequently used when they speak. 
This research was carried out within the framework of cognitive didactics of languages (Billières & Spanghero- 
Gaillard, 2005). It aims to shed light on vulnerable zones of oral expression among Iranian learners of French as 
a foreign language. We try, through some field study, to show how Iranian learners conceptualize complex acts 
(knowledge in a foreign language) and how they organize this knowledge, taking into account their cognitive 
development and their resort to interlanguage. 
2. Interlanguage 
Interlanguage is not limited to all the approaches that describe the process of acquisition of a foreign language. 
Two fundamental studies matured the concept of interlanguage, although the idea had already existed for a while. 
One  was  published  by  Corder  in  1967  in  International  Review  of  Applied  Linguistics,  The  significance  of 
learners’ errors, and the other by Selinker, Language transfer, published in 1969 in General Linguistics (Rosen & 
Porquier,  2003).  These  researchers  pioneered  the  research  in  this  field  and  have  since  been  considered  as 
founding fathers of the field precursors of which are error analysis and the study of morphemes. 
The  concept  was  further  developed  by  Selinker  in  an  article  titled  Interlanguage  which  was  published  in 
International Review of Applied Linguistics in 1972. Experts in applied linguistics adopted a variety of terms to 

 

117 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

refer  to  this  notion.  Corder  (1967)  talked  about  “transitional  competence”  and  later  in  1971  of  “transitional 
idiosyncratic  dialects”.  Nemser  (1971)  proposed  the  concept  of  “approximate  systems”.  However,  it  was  the 
term “interlanguage” proposed by Selinker that was widely accepted among linguists. 
It is to mention that the term interlanguage was not invented by Selinker. It was first used by the creolist, John 
Reinecke in his thesis in 1969 to describe the situation at the time of sugar plantation in Hawaii. He used the 
term  to  refer  to  nonstandard  variation  of  the  first  or  second  language  which  was  used  as  a  means  of 
communication among different groups, and which gradually approached the norms of the standard language of 
economically and politically dominant groups (Dewaele, 2003). 
In language teaching and learning, Vogel (1995) defines interlanguage as the language that a foreign language 
learner develops as he confronts elements of the target language without completely overlapping it. According to 
Bange (1992), the interlanguage of a non-native speaker is a set of linguistic and pragmatic rules which are not 
necessarily  coherent  or  complete  but  which  the  non-native  speaker  deems  sufficiently  compatible  with  the 
functions of the target language and which allows him to communicate. 
Interlanguage is therefore a set of implicit know-hows which enable the non-native to speak a foreign language. 
It represents a transitory system between the languages already acquired by the learner and the target language 
and so may derive from those linguistic systems. Its existence implies an innovative readjustment between these 
systems by the learner: it is an open system of which the user himself is an integral part, a transitory system that 
cannot be considered closed which is only regulated from the inside. The reason behind the difficulty to define 
interlanguage is its duality: its being systematic and its being variable. It is systematic when it causes linguistic 
behaviors that are not arbitrary. However, it carries traits exclusive to each learner. 
2.1 What Influences the Evolution of the Interlanguage? 
The evolution of the interlanguage generally depends on individual as well as environmental factors: 

‐  Learner-related  factors:  the  background  knowledge  of  the  learner,  his  cognition,  his  learning 

experiences, his motivation, etc. are to be considered as individual factors. 

‐  Didactical  and  pedagogical  factors:  objectives,  sifting  the  content,  teaching  conditions,  length  of  the 
class  and  teacher-related  variables,  similarities  between  previously-learned  languages  and  the  target 
language, etc. are among environmental factors. 

‐  Task-related  factors:  a  learner’s  interlanguage  varies  depending  on  the  type  of  the  task  he  does.  A 
translation  task,  for  instance,  brings  about  more  interference  than  a  report-writing  task  or  one  may 
notice more pronunciation errors when reading a text aloud than when speaking. Tarone (1979) calls 
this phenomenon “chameleon effect” of the interlanguage. 

2.2 Stages in Interlanguage Development 
As  we  just  mentioned,  the  stages  in  the  development  of  the  interlanguage  depends  on  individual  and  social 
variables related to the learning situation as well as on methodological variables. According to Vogel (1995), all 
theoretical approaches to language learning agree on one thing: whether it is a baby learning the mother tongue, 
or  some  individual  learning  a  foreign  language,  and  whether  it  takes  place  in  a  natural  or  in  an  institutional 
environment,  the  process  cannot  be  triggered  without  an  input.  This  input  may  come  from  an  interlocutor,  a 
teacher, the media, texts, educational material, etc. The learner processes the input by elaborating hypotheses. 
This process is summarized in the following diagram. 
 

 

118 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

Acquisition of 
interlanguage 

Input 

Identification 

Evaluation 

Implication 

Elaboration of 

hypothesis 

Comparaison 
with a lingustic  

knowledge

Confirmation of 

hypothesis 

Modification  of 

hypothesis 

Automatization 

Diagram 1. Stages in the development of the interlanguage, receptive type 

 

Transformation 
of lingustic  
knowledge 

 

According  to  this  model,  known  generally  as  receptive  (Vogel,  1995),  the  learner  with  a  given  input  first 
identifies  in  it  the  linguistic  forms  on  which  he  bases  his  hypotheses  and  compares  the  input  with  the 
hypothetical rules. The learner then verifies whether the input corresponds with the hypotheses. If the answer is 
affirmative,  the  hypothetical  rule  is  labeled  as  grammatically  correct  and  stored  in  long-term  memory.  If  the 
answer is negative, the learner will be led to restructuring this part of his linguistic knowledge. This, however, is 
not possible unless other input is sufficiently provided in order to compare, evaluate, and reformulate the initial 
hypothesis. Therefore, in case where a hypothesis is not confirmed, the learner has no choice but to maintain a 
cognitive control over the input related to that particular hypothesis.   
Another model that is often known as productive (Vogel, 1995) suggests that the learner first activates the part of 
his interlinguistic knowledge with a higher chance of creating a hypothesis in the target language. He tries to 
verify the hypothesis either by formulating it linguistically in the target language or by offering metalinguistical 
explanations  and  evaluating  the  interlocutor’s  feedback.  If  the  feedback  is  positive,  the  hypothesis  will  be 
confirmed, stored in the long-term memory, and retrieved if the need be. If negative feedback is received, the 
issue remains under cognitive control and sooner or later, a new hypothesis will be verified. 

Acquisition of  
interlanguage 

Activation of a 

linguistic 
knowledge  

Formulation 

Evaluation 

Implication 

Production with a 
hypothetical value

Confrontation with 

feedback 

Confirmation or  
modification of  

hypothesis 

Automatization 

Transformation of 

linguistic 
knowledge  

Diagram 2. Stages in the development of the interlanguage, productive type 

 

In  the  process  of  learning  a  foreign  language,  a  typically  interlinguistic  phenomenon,  specially  analyzed  by 
Selinker (1972), may occur: fossilization. It is observed when the interlinguistic hypothesis ends up being stored 
in the long-term memory and may be retrieved at any moment. 
3. Applying Anderson’s Theory to the Analysis of Spoken Interlanguage 
Spoken  language  is  the  result  of  a  marriage  between  declarative  knowledge  on  the  one  hand  and  procedural 
knowledge on the other. There are two major tendencies in theoretical debates: 

‐ 

Process-based  theories  which  consider  the  acquisition  of  a  skill  as  a  process.  Anderson’s  is  the  best 

 

 

119 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

known; 

‐  Memory-based  theories which  aim  to  explain how proficiency  is  achieved.  Gordon  Logan’s  instance 
theory is to mention here. According to this theory, a trace is automatically made in memory for each 
instance of processing.  Consistent  practice  creates  a  vast collection of  instances.  The more  there  are 
instances in the memory, the faster one may find the trace should the need arise (Hilton, 2005). 

The point these theories share is that the mastery of a language is the result of automatic cognitive processes. 
The key is to memorize and to repeat. We chose to base our research on Anderson’s model whose latest version 
is called ACT*, the abbreviation of Adaptive Control of Thought. The asterisk signifies it is the modified version 
of the original model. This model was developed to take into account a variety of cognitive activities such as 
memory, language, learning, reasoning, decision making, etc. and includes three stages: 
Interpretative stage 
Cognitive,  declarative,  or  interpretative  stage  implies  that  the  skill  that  is  to  be  acquired  is  encoded,  either 
through  instructions or  through  examples  (Anderson, 1993, 1995)  in  order  to  allow  the  learner  to  exhibit  the 
desired  behavior,  even  if  this  has  to  be  done  gradually  at  first.  During  this  first  stage,  the  language  plays  a 
significant part. This is manifested by the learner repeating the information necessary for exhibiting the behavior. 
The information provided for the learner is still presented in declarative form and must be interpreted in order to 
be executed. This is the stage where the required rules for understanding a task are encoded. 
At this stage, once a goal is achieved (an utterance is produced), the attention is drawn toward the next goal. 
Anderson (1983) believes that cognitive processing is serial since only one goal could be followed at a time. A 
lot of cognitive resources are required as the process necessitates keeping the declarative representation in the 
working memory. 
Verbalizations, repetitions, and hesitations when speaking a foreign language characterize this stage. For the sake 
of example, during an interaction, the learner has to understand, and then elaborate an utterance by verbalizing 
the question posed and by thinking about its meaning. 
Associative stage 
This  is  the  stage  where  knowledge  is  compiled.  In  computer  language,  it  is  the  transformation  of  a  source 
application (made by a programmer) to an executable application (0s and 1s) by a compiler. The transformation 
of an initial declarative representation to a procedure is achieved thanks to a process of compilation. This is the 
gradual phase of conversion from declarative knowledge to procedural knowledge. The process of compilation 
may be divided into two sub-processes: 

‐ 

‐ 

Proceduralization process which gradually replaces the interpretative application (controlled, slow, little 
reliable,  and  cognitively  costly)  of  productions  by  an  automatic  direct  application  that  no  longer 
necessitatesthe declarative knowledge used at the beginning of learning.   
It is the passage from controlled to automatic processing. Proceduralization reduces the cognitive load 
on the working memory since it is no longer necessary that the information coming from the long-term 
memory be kept there, which makes it possible to accomplish multiple tasks at once. 

‐  Composition process through which several related utterances are sorted, regrouped, and compensated 
to produce a new unique utterance. This could be considered as a process of creating macroproductions 
which run the operations of a pair of productions are organized in sequence (Anderson, 1983). It allows 
the system to function increasingly economical by reducing the number of productions the system has 
to make to accomplish a given task. 

The  errors which  characterize  the previous  stage  are  spotted  and progressively  eliminated.  The  learner’s  skill 
undergoes  a  gradual  transformation,  they  become  slightly  more  fluent,  make  fewer  mistakes,  and  find 
verbalization  less  necessary.  Self-corrections  and  soliciting  corrections  mark  oral  expression  in  a  foreign 
language. When a learner speaks in the language they are learning, they begin with the transfer of meaning and 
break up this meaning into components and then turn to the sub-problems of generating each component. Each 
sub-problem is broken up to the point where the learner obtains the units of meaning corresponding to words or 
sentences.   
Utterances  that  are  produced  in  this  way  reveal  several  features  which  allow  to  bring  the  proceduralization 
process closer to the autonomous process. These utterances lead to increasingly faster and more solid behavior. 
 

 

120 

www.ccsen

et.org/ies 

Internation

nal Education Stu

udies

Vol. 7, No. 6; 

2014 

ous stage 
Autonomo
nomous  stage 
The  auton
becomes mor
constantly 
some case
s, the learner e
the proced
dures, the proc
ch includes thr
phase whic
‐  G
Generalization 
‐  D
Discrimination 
‐  C
Consolidation w
an
nd external fee
wing diagram g
The follow
 

is  a  stage  of 
re automatic a
even loses the
cedural knowle
ree mechanism
which widens 
which narrow
which reinforc
edbacks play a
gives an overv

f adjustment  a
and faster and 
 capacity to ve
edge is applied
ms: 

and  refinemen
requires fewe
erbally describ
d more adequa

t  of  productio
er and fewer in
be the skill. Th
ately and rapid

ons.  During  th
nterventions o
hanks to practi
dly. This is in 

his  stage,  the 
of the cognitio
icing and repe
fact the proced

skill 
on. In 
ating 
dural 

the scope of p
ws the scope of 
ces the best pr
a crucial role h
iew of the abo

productions 
f productions
roductions and
here. 
ove-mentioned 

stages. 

d discourages t

the less accept

table ones. Int

ternal 

Oral production 

stages

Interpretative 

stage

Associative stage

Autonomo

ous stage

Follow verb
bal 
ns
instruction

Applying oper
of problem so

rators 
olving

Using analo

ogies

Procedurali

ization

Composi

ition

Gegeneral

lization

Discrim

ination

Strengt

thening

Acq
oper

quiring 
rators

Orga
oper

anizing 
rators

Reducing 
differences

Dec
goa

composition of 
als in sub-goals

Diagram 3. 

Stages in oral 

production ac

cording to And

derson 

 

 

stage during w
ey try to keep 
ity in producin
ey  need  to  pr
ad and to push 

which the cogni
in mind or me
ng ready-mad
roduce  an  utte
learners towar

itive load is re
emorize some 
e phrases sinc
erance.  The  ul
rd spontaneity.

educed. Learne
linguistic stru
ce they find it 
timate  goal  of
   

ers try to reduc
ctures. They p
hardly possib
f  teaching/lear

ce the 
prefer 
ble to 
rning 

ule which spec

cifies a conditi

ion (IF) and an

n action (THEN

N). It 

atches the con
n the working 
specificity prin
o the informati
ails this princip
an” in English 

 

nditions of a pr
memory match
nciple favors th
ion in the work
ple.   

roduction, then
hes several pro
he initiation of
king memory, 

n the producti
oductions, the
f procedures w
etc. It is to rem

ion is 
n the 
which 
mind 

This mode
cognitive l
to reach a 
spend  so  m
speaking i
3.1 Produc
The produ
is also call
If the activ
spontaneou
conflict re
consist of 
that it is th
Example: i
And if you

el considers an
load, which ex
certain degre
much  energy 
s to reduce the
ction Rules in A
uction rule is an
led a “conditio
ve information
usly triggered.
solving rules i
the largest num
he control of th
if your goal is 
u know that the

n autonomous s
xplains why th
ee of spontane
every  time  th
e cognitive loa
ACT Theory 
n IF…THEN r
on-action” rule
n in the workin
. If the active 
intervene. For 
mber of condit
he cognitive sy
to produce the
e plural of “ma

rule, that is a ru
e.   
ng memory m
information in
example, the s
tions related to
ystem that enta
e plural of “ma
an” is “men” 

 

121 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

Then say: men 
Thanks to this rule, we may formulate the processes of analogy, generalization, and discrimination as presented 
in the following section. 
3.1.1 Generalization 
According to Anderson (1995), generalization algorithm looks for similarities in a couple of production rules and 
creates, based on them, a new production rule which contains what was common among the former rules. We 
may proceed with an example of the generalization in English: 
R1 If you want to turn the verb “walk” to the past tense   
then use the unmarked form “walk” 
and add the suffix–ed 
R2 If you want to turn the verb “jump” to the past tense 
then use the unmarked form “jump” 
and add the suffix–ed 
Based on these two specific rules, one may induce (with the risk of overgeneralization)   
R3 If you want to turn a verb to the past tense   
then use the unmarked form of the verb 
and add the suffix–ed 
In such a case, new constraints should be applied to avoid the risk of overgeneralization. According to Anderson, 
learners constantly look to compare the procedural rules that they have just made to other procedural rules which 
already exist in order to see if a potential generalization is possible. That is the condition for productivity and 
therefore for the progress of learning. However, the general rule is not very solid at first as it is not based on a 
vast database. It will be put at test, which may lead to discrimination.   
This period of overgeneralization is when learners start to reason in L2. They demonstrate the ability to infer the 
regularities of the language. 
3.1.2 Discrimination 
Thanks  to  the  process  of  discrimination,  the  application  of  a  procedural  rule  is  restricted  to  only  appropriate 
circumstances. Recognizing the exceptions of a general rule or adapting one’s manner of speaking to a certain 
situation are examples of discrimination. 
Generalization and discrimination are inductive components of the learning system because they try to extract 
examples of the characteristic features, allowing the learner to determine when a procedural rule is applicable. 
Every time a rule is successfully applied, it is consolidated. External positive feedback plays a decisive part in 
consolidation. In contrast, if learners judge a rule as inadequate by a negative feedback, the rule is weakened and 
they try to construct new hypotheses. With successive executions, anticipation of results become more precise 
and mature, the process becomes less demanding and the cognitive resources are freed up. This is what Anderson 
calls knowledge proceduralization.   
Sharing Bange’s viewpoint (Bange et al., 2005), we believe that learning a foreign language is not like being 
gradually  shaped  in  a  prefabricated  mold  (L2  system),  which  regards  learning  as  a  passive  process  as  in 
behaviorist concepts, or like a system dormant in the faculty of language, but like a progressive recreation, a 
construction based on general cognitive mechanisms. 
4. Field Study 
4.1 Context 
The data were collected in the central branch of a big language institute, Ghotbe Ravandi, Tehran, Iran. It is to 
mention that the French language is taught as a foreign language in Iran. The official language is Persian and 
English is learned at schools as the first foreign language. French may be learned as the second foreign language 
at  some  universities  or  language  schools  where  intensive  or  extensive  courses  are  offered.  The  major  course 
books currently in use are le Nouveau Taxi, Alter Ego, Écho, Reflets, etc. 
4.2 Corpus 
Thirty learners made up our corpus. Nine of them were at A1 level, six at A2, nine at B1, and six at B2 level. 

 

122 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

They were all 20 to 40-year-old adults, both males and females, whose mother tongue was Persian and, in some 
cases,  Azeri,  spoken  by  Turks  in  Iran.  They  could  all  speak  English  and  their  level  ranged  from  beginner  to 
advanced. They had all learned French in language schools or universities in Iran. Their contact with the French 
language  was  limited  to  institutional  contexts,  in  classrooms  with  classmates  and  teachers.  They  did  not  use 
French to communicate with native speakers of French. 
The approximate number of hours required to complete a level and pass to the next is 200. Each intensive course 
is  held  in  72  hours  while  extensive  courses  offer  36-40  hours  of  class.  Our  investigation  was  carried  out 
throughout a semester.   
Learners already had a notion of parts of speech thanks to either the languages they had already learned or the 
grammatical approach to teaching in their French classes. 
4.3 Methodology 
In  order  to  conduct  the  field  study,  we  adopted  a  quantitative  and  qualitative  approach  to  interviewing.  The 
interviews were individual and semi-guided with closed and open questions.   
We  also  recorded  class  conversations  during  a  semester  which  gave  us  an  overview  of  the  evolution  of 
interlanguage through different levels (A1-B2) in a pseudo-longitudinal way. 
Our  study  consisted  of  a  speaking  test  where  the  interviewer  asked  questions  to  which  the  learners  were 
supposed  to  answer.  Depending  on  the  learners’  responses,  the  interviewer  asked  other  questions  in  order  to 
involve  them  in  a  spontaneous  conversation.  The  learners  did  not  have  the  time  to  prepare  their  utterances  a 
priori and the whole process was recorded. We had a total of three and half hours of recording: 49 minutes for A1 
level, 37 minutes for A2 level, 85 minutes for B1 level, and 39 minutes for B2 level.   
It is to mention that the duration of the recordings was not decided in advance. What counted most was to give 
the learners the chance to express themselves without having to worry about time. 
4.4 Data Analysis 
To  analyze  the  data,  we  adopted  the  content  analysis  technique  which  may  be  applied  to  all  responses  to 
how-and-why questions (Zihisire, 2011). Our approach to error analysis was to identify, classify, and interpret 
the errors.   
The  works  of  cognitive  theoreticians  who  are  interested  in  general  principles  of  error  production  contributes 
greatly to teaching languages in spite of having a basically different scope. For cognitive psychology, error is in 
fact a gateway to mental processes to which there is no direct access (Larruy, 2003). The analysis of errors and 
their  causes  in  the  course  of  learning  a  foreign  language  has  shown  that  not  only  may  errors  explain  the 
phenomena of evolution and planification of a language, but they could also be interpreted effectively as being 
systematic and stem from rules. 
It is needless to say that in order to identify the error, one must have a norm to compare it to. According to Ogien 
(2009), to identify an error, one must know the standard and adequate way of doing a given act. 
As for classification, we chose sample-based classification: errors were first collected and interpreted. We then 
established an appropriate taxonomy.   
Regarding the interpretation of errors, we tried to offer the most plausible interpretation since the learners were 
absent at this stage and we had to guess what they meant to convey. 
5. Results and Discussion 
We  noted  errors  of  omission,  addition,  substitution,  and  in  certain  cases,  displacement.  Once  the  errors  were 
categorized, they were coded to be localized. The following diagram summarizes these categories. 
 

Syntaxe  

Determinants 

Nouns 

Verbs 

Pronouns  

Adjectives 

Adverbs 

Prepositions 

Conjunctions  

 

Diagram 4. Syntactical components of the error analysis 

 

 

123 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

The  analysis  of  the  learners’  non  errors  showed  that  the  preexisting  notions  in  languages  already  learned  are 
more deeply carved into their memory (the non errors in case of the omission of a possessive or demonstrative 
adjective are the proof). 
The  analysis  of  the  errors  in  our  corpus  helped  us  to  better  understand  the  evolution  of  the  interlanguage  of 
Iranian learners of French as a foreign language. Non persistent errors are mainly interlingual errors whereas 
persistent errors are mostly intralingual. Here we may refer to substituting the present tense, omitting the definite 
articles,  substituting  nouns,  conjugating  verbs  at  present,  and  substituting  prepositions.  To  be  more  precise, 
errors at A1 level mainly included bad verb conjugation and at A2, B1, and B2 levels were wrong word choices 
and inappropriate prepositions. 
For instance, learners tend to invert the order of proper nouns. Knowing that Persian and French have little in 
common, they resort to their knowledge of English, leading to the emergence of such errors. This kind of error 
has to occur under the influence of the English language because in Persian proper noun order is identical to that 
in French. This error, being interlingual, is far from being persistent. 
It is worthy of mention that among linguistic structures, those which do not exist beforehand in the learners’ 
cognitive knowledge (notions inexistent in the mother tongue and whose command are not yet good in a foreign 
language  they  have  already  learned)  prove  to  be  more  problematic  and  a  source  of  error,  as  it  is  the  case  of 
definite  articles  that  do  not  exist  in  Persian.  Although  this  grammatical  category  exists  in  English  –  the  first 
foreign language of the learners –the mastery of its use remains incomplete.   
At times, the input on the workings of the target language is poor or deficient and the rules are not thoroughly 
explained.  As  a  result,  it  will  be  more  likely  that  overgeneralization  and  indiscrimination  of  rules  occur  and 
consequently learners are pushed toward producing an erroneous utterance. When the different contexts in which 
a certain rule is applied are not clearly described, learners tend to overgeneralize the rule. Recent approaches to 
language teaching, particularly the communicative and task-based approaches which emphasize the importance 
of the meaning and conveying the message in communication to the point that they leave behind the grammatical 
rules used in speech acts. That is prioritizing the meaning to the detriment of linguistic forms. Thus, erroneous 
utterances are reinforced by several cognitive operations. The following examples show how overgeneralization 
leads to grammatically incorrect forms. 
la rôle de technologie = the role of technology 
c’est par exemple un façon = that’s for example a way 
Procedural rules could be reformulated as: 
Rule 1: If all the words ending to e are feminine, 
Then the word “rôle” is feminine. 
Rule 2: If all the words ending to nasal sounds are masculine, 
Then the word “façon” is masculine. 
Moreover, there were learners in our corpus who made an inference in order to make up the word they did not 
know in French. The examples below show how the learners, under the influence of English, used the words 
“nouveaux” and “neufs” to say “news” in French. 
If in English “news” is “new” plus s, 
Then its French equivalent must be “nouveau” or “neuf” plus s. 
je regardes les nouveaux = I watch the “nouveau” 
je regarde les neufs = I watch the “neuf” 
Furthermore,  in  some  cases,  they  made  sentences  based  on  analogy.  The  learners  presupposed  that  certain 
English structures were the same in French and therefore made interlingual errors. This is caused by some sort of 
mental translation from previously-learned languages into the target language. 
Je suis trente ans = I am thirty years old (Note that in French the verb “avoir” (to have) must be used, so the 
word-by-word translation from French would be “I have thirty years”). 
Interestingly, sometimes even when the learners failed to retrieve a French word from memory, either because 
they simply did not know the word or because they just could not remember it, they would use an English or 
Persian word, being well aware of its inadequacy. This is how their just-get-the-message-through strategy wins. 
However, this was most commonly observed among learners at A1 level.   

 

124 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

Je suis staff. 
When learners at B1 and B2 levels lacked a particular word, their strategy largely consisted of paraphrasing not 
only in order to maintain the conversation but also to learn the word they lacked. This is what De Pietro et al. 
(1989)  call  potential  sequence  of  acquisition,  a  kind  of  interactive  sequence  which  particularly  favors  the 
acquisition of a new element of the target language. In the following example, the learner adds a new term to his 
lexicon through heterostructuring (Py, 1990). 
Learner: il y a eh quelque chose de matier de plastique = there’s something of plastic 
Interviewer : une nappe tu veux dire = a table cloth you mean 
The form of some types of errors evolve from one level to another. For instance, while learners at A1 and A2 
levels used Persian or English words if they did not know its French equivalent, learners at B1 and B2 levels 
tended to use inappropriate synonyms. 
J’ai TOEFL et c’est mon marque c’est 120 (the French “marque” is a bad synonym for “note” which means 
“mark” in English) 
Je ne crois jamais sur cet eh sujet- sur ce sujet (the French “crois” is a bad synonym for “pense” which means 
“think” in English) 
Je ne dépense pas mon temps pour (The French “dépense” is a bad synonym for “passe” which means “spend” 
in English) 
Omission of definite articles undergo some noteworthy evolution as well. At A1 and A2 levels, this error is seen 
before words or after using a preposition where contracted articles are needed whereas in B1 and B2 levels, the 
learners dropped the article before the second word in compound nouns.   
le rythme de Ø vie 
We  also  noticed  that  at  B2  level,  whenever  the  cognitive  load  of  preparing  a  sentence  is  relatively  heavy, 
persistent errors emerge. 
Ø natation c’est un sport que : vous faisez dans par exemple en été.(omission of the definite article and wrong 
verb conjugation) 
In addition, there were cases of francization of English words in pronunciation. Learners try to make up lexical 
forms during the interaction under the influence of other languages they know (Hammaberg, 2006). The learners 
resorted  to  English  to  compensate  for  their  lack  of  French  vocabulary.  This  code  switching,  however 
phonologically adapted to French, is morphologically incompatible.   
à cause de cette phenomenon (The French word is “phénomène”) 
Je  désigner  certains  groupes  d’équipement  pour  eh  relative  de  petroleum  eh  industrie  de  petroleum.  (The 
French word is “pétrole”) 
At B1 and B2 levels errors may derive from overextension. This happens when the learner tries to show off his 
linguistic abilities by using a particular word that is more prestigious than the other, or a certain structure which 
is more complicated than the other, resulting in an erroneous utterance. In the examples below, the learner uses 
the past tense instead of the present because the past tense has a more complex structure. 
Je me suis servi de mon ordinateur (instead of saying “je me sers de mon ordinateur” = I use my computer) 
J’ai compris turque (instead of saying “je comprends le turque” = I understand Turkish) 
There  were  also  cases  of  fossilization  where  learners  repeated  the  mistakes  when  they  used  speech  acts 
expressing what they had learned in the beginning of their learning process such as speech acts expressing one’s 
job, languages, field of study, etc. 
Je  travaille  à  un  bureau  de  conseiller  (instead  of  saying“Je  travaille  à  un  bureau  de  conseil”  =  I  workat  an 
advising center) 
The  analysis  of  the  errors  and  non-errors  in  our  corpus  show  that  of  the  three  cognitive  operations  of 
generalization, discrimination, and consolidation, the learners would rather use generalization, which often leads 
to overgeneralization. Learners who inferred and generalized produced more utterances than those who did not. 
This is to say that they are more fluent in oral production. 
It is to mention one more time that in our corpus, there were learners whose mother tongue was Azeri, spoken by 
Turks  in  Iran.  The  analysis  of  their  errors  did  not  reveal  any  differences  from  the  errors  of  Persian-speaking 
learners. This might be justified by active and dormant languages at the time of production. Most learners’ active 

 

125 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

language in the class was English and for some it was Persian.   
In  general,  the  interviewer  corrected  the  learners  by  reformulating  their  answers  correctly.  However,  in  some 
cases, the learners’ attention was so drawn to their own utterances or elaborating the next ones that they did not 
notice her corrections. This is an indication of the heavy cognitive load for preparing the utterances and the order 
of attention in the cognitive phase.   
Although the grammatical heritage of learners could be a source of even unsurmountable difficulties, teachers 
simply cannot wipe the slate clean and start all over again. A fundamental principle in the learning process is to 
relate  the  newly-presented  to  already-learned  material.  An  efficient  teaching  strategy  takes  into  account  the 
grammatical culture of the learners (Barbazan, 2007). Since our error categories are by no means exhaustive, we 
propose changing the context of oral production to make a more comprehensive list. 
6. Conclusion 
Learning a foreign language as procedural knowledge is a gradual process through which the learners’ abilities 
are developed. Each level is marked by the presence of certain errors which generally disappear in the next level. 
Within each level, learners correct themselves as they speak. We may therefore say that learning is not a linear 
process.  This  means  during  the  passage  from  a  controlled  process  to  an  autonomous  one,  both  processes 
combine. 
Knowing each level and its typical errors, teachers are able to consciously decide what to correct, what risks to 
be fossilized, and what will be resolved once the learner completes the level.   
Those learners who make more hypotheses on the workings of the language, that is, those who often use mental 
operations (analogy, inference, generalization, etc.) are more fluent. They take more risk as they speak even at 
the cost of accuracy. 
Errors must be judged from a different point of view. Most often they are creative gaps compared to the norms of 
the  target  language,  indicate  the  learner’s  exploratory  behavior  applying  generative  rules,  and  are  part  of  the 
continuous process of differentiation which allows them to refine their knowledge of the language they learn. 
This is the reason why learners should never be penalized for their erroneous utterances. Thus, to understand a 
language learner is to pay attention to their psychological, linguistic, and psycholinguistic components and also 
to the context they are in and to the way their interlanguage evolves.   
In practice, learner errors are a rich source to make use of. The authors recommend dealing with learner errors in 
depth,  avoiding  immediate  and  simple  correction  of  them.  It  is  preferable  that  teachers  point  to  the  errors 
afterward, especially to those more frequently made. This is how learners are guided toward self-correction.   
Teachers of French in Iran may adopt a negotiating approach. By discussing the errors with each learner, not 
only do they become conscious of their mistakes, but they also become engaged in trying to remedy them.   
References 
Anderson, J. R. (1993). Rules of the mind. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Anderson, J. R. (1995). Learning and memory: An integrated approach. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Anderson, J. R. (1983). The Architecture of Cognition. Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. 
Bange, P. (2005). L'apprentissage d'une langue étrangère: Cognition et interaction. Paris: L’Harmattan. 
Barbazan,  M.  (2007).  Les  temps  verbaux  du  passé:  Quelle  didactique  pour  le  FLE?  Repères  linguistiques  et 

cognitifs. Colloque International de Didactique Cognitive des Langues, Toulouse. 

Billières,  M.,  &  Spanghero-Gaillard,  N.  (2005).  La  didactique  cognitive  des  langues:  Regards  croisés  de 

disciplines. Comment comprendre le comment? Revue Parole. 

De Pietro, J.-F., Matthey, M., & Py, B. (1989). Acquisition et contrat didactique: Les séquences potentiellement 
acquisitionnelles  dans  la  conversation  exolingue.  Actes  du  3ème  colloque  régional  de  linguistique. 
Strasbourg, Université de Strasbourg. 

Dewaele, J. M. (2003). Compte rendu–hommage: L’œuvre de L. Selinker. Linx [En ligne], 49|2003, mis en ligne 

le 18 mars 2011. Retrieved from http://linx.revues.org/564 

Hammaberg, B. (2006). Activation de L1 ET L2 lors de la production orale en L3. Acquisition et interaction 
enlangue  étrangère,  n  24.  [En  ligne],  24|2006,  mis  en  ligne  le  30  juin  2009.  Retrieved  from 
http://aile.revues.org/1641 

Hilton,  H.  (2008).  Connaissances,  procédures  et  production  orale  en  L2.  Acquisition  et  interaction  enlangue 

 

126 

www.ccsenet.org/ies 

International Education Studies 

Vol. 7, No. 6; 2014 

étrangère [En ligne], 27|2008. Retrieved from http://aile.revues.org/4113 

Lafontaine,  L.  (2002-2003).  Rapport  intermédiaire,  Projet  de  Recherche  franco-québécois.  Oral,  savoirs, 
socialisation.  Compétences  langagières  orales  de  la  maternelle  au  collège,  dans  leur  relation  à  la 
socialisation  et  aux  apprentissages:  prise  de  parole,  conduites  discursives,  lexique,  métacognition. 
Retrieved from http://www.lizannelafontaine.com/.../rapport_intermediaire 

Laurruy, M. M. (2003). L’interprétation de l’erreur. Paris: CLE international. 
Ogien, A. (2009). Le non-lieu de l’erreur. Sous la direction de Chauviré & Ch, Ogien, A. Dynamique de l’erreur. 

Paris: Éditions de l’École des hautes études en sciences sociales. 

Py,  B.  (1990).  Les  stratégies  d’acquisition  en  situation  d’interaction,  Gaonac’h,  D.  (coord.),  Acquisition  et 

utilisation d’une langue étrangère. L’approche cognitive. Paris: Hachette. 

Rosen, É., & Porquier, R. (2003). Présentation. L’actualité des notions d’Interlangue et d’interaction exolingue. 

Linx [En ligne], 49|2003. Retrieved from http ://linx.revues.org/524 

chameleon. 

Language 

Learning, 

29(1), 

181-191. 

Tarone, 

E. 

(1979). 

Interlanguage 

as 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1979.tb01058.x 

Vogel,  K.  (1995).  L’interlangue  la  langue  de  l’apprenant.  Traduit  de  l’allemand  par  Jean-Sébastien  Roux  et 

Patrick Bonin. Toulouse: Presses Universitaires du Mirail II. 

Zihisire,  M.  M.  (2011).  La  recherche  en  sciences  sociales  et  humaines:  Guide  pratique,  méthodologie  et  cas 

concrets. Paris: L’Harmattan. 

 
Copyrights 
Copyright for this article is retained by the author(s), with first publication rights granted to the journal. 
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/). 
 

 

127 

