 

Psicológica (2014), 35, 139-148. 

 

Simultaneous stimulus preexposure enhances human 

tactile perceptual learning 

Gabriel Rodríguez* and Rocío Angulo 
Universidad del País Vasco (UPV/EHU) 

 

An  experiment  with  human  participants  established  a  novel  procedure  to 
assess  perceptual  learning  with  tactile  stimuli.    Participants  received 
unsupervised exposure to two sandpaper surfaces differing in roughness (A 
and B). The ability of the participants to discriminate between the stimuli 
was subsequently assessed on a same/different test. It was found that prior 
exposure to the stimuli led to more accurate judgements on the different-
trials.  Furthermore,  simultaneous  exposure  to  the  stimuli  enhanced  this 
accuracy  more  than  sequential  exposure  (A,  B,  A,  B…).  These  findings 
extend recent results from visual studies to the tactile modality, confirming 
that simultaneous exposure produces a marked perceptual learning effect. 
 
 
Exposure 

stimuli  can 

similar 

to 

two 

facilitate 

subsequent 
discrimination  between  them  (i.e.,  can  reduce  the  extent  to  which 
generalization occurs between them). Examples of this perceptual learning 
effect have been extensively observed in a wide variety of procedures and 
species (see Mitchell & Hall, in press, for a recent review). In order to get a 
better  understanding  of  the  mechanisms  involved  in  this  phenomenon, 
researchers  have  attempted  to  determine  which  conditions  of  stimulus 
exposure are most optimal in generating perceptual learning. In this regard, 
several  studies,  with  both  human  and  nonhuman  animals,  have  been 
specifically  designed  to  test  the  notion  that  perceptual  learning  is  more 
likely 
that  favour  stimulus 
comparison (Gibson, 1969).  

to  occur  under  preexposure  conditions 

                                                 
*  This  research  was  supported  by  grants  from  the  Spanish  Ministerio  de  Economía  y 
Competitividad  (PSI2011-2431),  and  Gobierno  Vasco  (IT-276-07).    Correspondence 
concerning this article should be addressed to Gabriel Rodríguez, Facultad de Psicología, 
Universidad  del  País  Vasco,  San  Sebastián,  Guipuzkoa,  20018,  Spain.  E-mail: 
gabriel.rodriguez@ehu.es 

 

140 
 

G. Rodríguez & R. Angulo 

Most of the human studies addressing this issue have involved visual 
stimuli, and have produced data that seem to confirm the beneficial effect of 
stimulus comparison in generating the perceptual learning effect. Perhaps 
the  clearest  effect  supporting  this  notion  is  the  finding  that  simultaneous 
presentation  of  two  stimuli  produces  better  discrimination  than  does 
sequential exposure (Angulo & Alonso, 2012; Mundy, Honey, & Dwyer, 
2007; 2009). The generality of this effect has been well established across a 
variety of visual stimuli (e.g., Arabic symbols in the study by Angulo and 
Alonso,  and  morphed  pictures  of  human  faces  and  black-and-white 
checkerboard patterns in the studies by Mundy et al.). It is clear, however, 
that further research involving other sensory modalities in addition to vision 
is necessary to establish whether or not stimulus comparison has general 
relevance for human perceptual learning. The aim of the present experiment 
was to contribute to this issue, extending the study of this simultaneous-
sequential preexposure effect to a human procedure using tactile stimuli. 

The design and the logic of the experiment were very similar to that 
employed in previous studies with human (e.g., Mundy et al., 2009) and 
nonhuman animals (e.g., Rodríguez & Alonso, 2008; Rodríguez, Blair, & 
Hall, 2008).  It consisted of two phases (see Table 1). In the first phase, the 
opportunity  to  compare  two  tactile  stimuli  was  manipulated  across 
conditions. Two sandpaper surfaces differing in roughness were used as the 
stimuli  (A  and  B).  Participants  in  Group  SIM  received  simultaneous 
preexposure to both surfaces. On each preexposure trial, these participants 
were allowed to touch both A and B at the same time, each one with an 
index  finger.  Participants  in  Group  SEQ  received  the  same  number  of 
presentations of A and B, but sequentially rather than simultaneously. On 
each preexposure trial, these participants were allowed to touch only one 
surface (A or B) with the index finger of their dominant hand. Presentations 
of A and B were alternated across this sequential schedule (e.g., A, B, A, 
B…). Finally, Group CTRL provided a control condition for which there 
was no preexposure to the stimuli.  

On  the  subsequent  test  phase,  the  ability  of  all  the  participants  to 
discriminate  between  the  stimuli  was  assessed  with  a  same/different 
judgement  task  (e.g.,  Dwyer,  Hodder,  &  Honey,  2004).  Each  test  trial 
consisted of the sequential presentation of two surfaces. At the end of each 
test trial, participants were asked to judge whether or not the two surfaces 
which they had just touched, were the same or different. There were 4 test 
trials: 2 “same” trials (A-A, and B-B), and 2 “different” trials (A-B, and B-
A).  According  to  the  hypothesis  that  stimulus  comparison  facilitates 
perceptual learning, and on the basis of previous studies using visual cues 
(e.g., Mundy et al., 2009), we expected to find that the groups that were 

Tactile Perceptual Learning 

141 

allowed to compare the stimuli during preexposure, Groups SIM and SEQ, 
would perform better on the test (would discriminate between the stimuli) 
than  the  nonpreexposed  control  group.  In  addition,  since  it  seems 
reasonable to assume that simultaneous exposure offers the most optimal 
conditions  for  stimulus  comparison  to  occur  (e.g.,  Gibson  1969,  p.145; 
Mundy et al., 2007; 2009), we also expected to find better test performance 
in Group SIM than in Group SEQ. 

METHOD 

Participants. A total of 42 participants, 34 female and 8 male, were 
recruited from the School of Psychology at the University of the Basque 
Country. All were right-handed and ranged in age from 20 to 33 years. They 
were  graduate  students  who  did  not  receive  any  financial  incentive  to 
participate.  Participants  were  randomly  assigned,  in  equal  numbers,  to 
groups SIM, SEQ, and CTRL. 

 
Stimuli. Squares of 10 x 10 cm made from commercially produced 
sandpapers (Debray, Barcelona, Spain) differing in roughness were used as 
the stimuli (grit grade “4” as the rougher surface, and grit grade “6” as the 
smoother surface). For half of the participants, the rougher surface served as 
stimulus A and the smoother surface as stimulus B. For the remainder this 
arrangement was reversed. 

 
Procedure  and 

instructions.  Participants 

the 
preexposure and test trials in a single session. They were trained and tested 
individually. Prior to the beginning of the experiment, the participants were 
asked  to  sit  comfortably  at  a  table  facing  the  experimenter.  The 
experimenter then read the following instructions: 

received  all 

 
You are about to participate in an experiment concerning the sense of 
touch.  Therefore,  you  will  be  blindfolded  in  order  to  eliminate  any 
information coming from your sense of vision. In the experiment, you will 
use the index fingers of your hands only. I will guide your fingers toward 
some innocuous surfaces. I will allow you to touch them freely for some 
time. I will also indicate to you when you have to stop touching them, by 
lifting your fingers. This procedure will be repeated several times.  

 

142 
 

G. Rodríguez & R. Angulo 

Once  the  experimenter  had  ensured  that  the  participants  had 
understood  the  instructions,  the  experiment  began.  Participants  were 
blindfolded and rested their wrists on a desktop, with their fingers elevated. 
On  each  trial,  the  experimenter  guided  the  corresponding  finger  of  the 
participants to the corresponding surface. Once the distal segment of the 
finger made contact with the surface, the participants were allowed to freely 
touch the surface during a 5-second period. The interval between trials was 
15 seconds. No explicit separation occurred between the preexposure and 
test phases. No feedback was provided during the experiment. 

 
Preexposure. For Group SIM, this phase consisted of 4 trials. On each 
trial, participants in this group were allowed to touch simultaneously the A 
and B surfaces, each one with the index finger of each hand. The position of 
the surfaces for the left and right hands was counterbalanced.  For Group 
SEQ,  this  phase  consisted  of  8  trials.  On  each  trial,  participants  were 
allowed to touch one surface with the index finger of their dominant hand. 
Half of the participants in this group received the following sequence of 
surface presentations: A, B, A, B, A, B, A, B. The other half received the 
opposite sequence: B, A, B, A, B, A, B, A. Group CTRL  did not receive 
any training prior to the test phase. 

 
Test. For all of the groups, this phase consisted of 4 trials. Each trial 
consisted  of  the  sequential  presentation  of  two  sandpaper  surfaces.  We 
chose the sequential procedure on test to help avoid trivial explanations for 
the  superior  performance  of  the  simultaneous  group.    Participants  in  the 
sequential group should have an advantage because there was no change in 
procedure between training and testing.  For that, superior performance on 
the test of the simultaneous group should not be due to the test procedure. 
As  with  the  preexposure  phase,  the  duration  of  the  presentation  of  each 
surface was 5 seconds, and the interval between the first and the second 
presentation was 15 seconds. There were 4 test trials, 2 “same” trials (A-A, 
B-B), and 2 “different” trials (A-B, B-A). The order of presentation of these 
trials was randomized for each participant.  At the end of each test trial, 
participants were asked to judge whether the two surfaces which they had 
just touched, were the same or different. The scores for the two “same” test 
trials and the two “different” test trials were combined to produce a mean 
score for the “same” and “different” conditions, respectively. 

 
 
 

Table 1. Experimental Design 
 

 

Preexposure 

 

 
SIM group 
 

 
SEQ group 
 

 
CTRL group 
 

A&B-A&B-A&B-A&B 

A-A, B-B        A-B, B-A 

A-B-A-B-A-B-A-B 

A-A, B-B        A-B, B-A 

A-A, B-B        A-B, B-A 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

Tactile Perceptual Learning 

143 

 

Same-different test 

 
             

Note: A and B refer to sandpaper surfaces differing in roughness. Stimuli separated by an 
ampersand (&) were presented simultaneously within the same trial, and those separated by 
a dash (-) were presented sequentially, with an interval of 15 sec between them. 

 

RESULTS 

Figure 1 shows the mean proportions of correct responses on “same” 
and “different” test trials. Inspection of the figure suggests that accuracy on 
trials  in  which  two  surfaces  with  the  same  roughness  were  presented 
(“same”  test  trials)  was  higher  than  that  on  trials  in  which  two  different 
surfaces  were  presented.  It  is  also  apparent  from  the  figure  that  on  the 
“different” test trials, accuracy was higher in Group SIM than in Groups 
SEQ and CTRL, and higher in Group SEQ than in Group CTRL. However, 
there were no apparent differences among the groups on the “same” trials. 
A Group (SIM, SEQ, CTRL) by Trial type (different vs. same) analysis of 
variance (ANOVA) confirmed these impressions. It revealed a borderline 
effect of Group, F(2, 39) = 2.78, MSE = .084, and a significant effect of 
trial type, F(1, 39) = 5.21, MSE = .128 (here and elsewhere a significance 
level of p <.05 was adopted). The interaction between these variables was 
also significant, F(2, 36) = 5.63, MSE = .128. In order to explore the source 
of this interaction, a simple main effects analysis was conducted. It revealed 
a group effect on the “different” trials, F(2, 39) = 7.1, MSE = .125,  but not 

144 
 

G. Rodríguez & R. Angulo 

on the “same” trials, F(2, 39) < 1, MSE =.088. Pairwise comparisons using 
Duncan tests showed that performance in the “different” trials was better in 
Group SIM than in Groups INT and CTRL, and better in Group INT than 
Group CTRL.  
 

SIM SEQ CTRL

s
t
n
e
m
e
g
d
u

j
 
t
c
e

r
r

o
c

 
f

 

o
n
o
i
t
r

r

o
p
o
p
n
a
e
M

 

1

0,8

0,6

0,4

0,2

0

Same

Different

Figure 1. Mean proportion of correct responses on same and different 
test trials. Training conditions are illustrated in Table 1 and described 
in the text.  Vertical bars represent the standard errors of the means 
(SEMs). 

DISCUSSION 

The present data provide clear evidence of a perceptual learning effect 
on a same-different test, using a novel procedure involving tactile stimuli 
differing in roughness. Stimuli A and B were judged to be different with 
more accuracy (i.e., were more easily discriminated) after brief preexposure 
to  them.  In  addition,  the  schedule  by  which  the  stimuli  were  presented 
(simultaneous vs. sequential) influenced the degree to which preexposure 
facilitated discrimination. We found that discrimination was enhanced more 
by simultaneous preexposure than by sequential preexposure. These results 
thus seem to support the general relevance of the hypothesis that motivated 

 

Tactile Perceptual Learning 

145 

the  present  study:  perceptual  learning  is  enhanced  by  preexposure 
conditions most favouring stimulus comparison. This hypothesis was first 
proposed by Gibson (1969), in her influential theory of perceptual learning. 
She  suggested  that  stimulus  comparison  fosters  a  differentiation  process, 
which increases the perceptual effectiveness or salience of the distinctive 
features of the stimuli (in our experiment, the roughness of the sandpaper 
surfaces), and reduces that of their common features (in our experiment, all 
the  other  characteristics  shared  by  the  sandpaper  surfaces).  This  would 
allow one to detect and process the distinctive features more easily, thus 
enhancing  the  perceptual  dissimilarity  of  the  stimuli  and  reducing 
generalization between them. What Gibson did not specify, however, was 
the  learning  mechanism  responsible  for  these  changes  in  the  stimulus 
salience.  

In order to mend this lack of specification, several authors (e.g., Hall, 
2001; Honey & Bateson, 1996; Mackintosh, 2009; Mitchell, 2010; Mitchell 
& Hall, in press; Mundy et al., 2007; 2009) have offered similar analyses 
appealing to the phenomenon of habituation. More specifically, they have 
taken into consideration the short-term habituation mechanism proposed by 
Wagner (1981).  

According to Wagner (1981), presentation of a given stimulus results 
in habituation to its constituent elements, which makes them less likely to 
be  fully  processed  when  they  are  presented  again  after  a  relatively  short 
interval.  Any  two  similar  stimuli,  A  and  B,  might  be  conceptualized  as 
compound  stimuli,  ax  and  bx,  where  x  represents  those  features  that  are 
common to both stimuli, and a and b represent the features that are unique 
to A and B, respectively. In our experiment, the two surfaces A and B can 
similarly be conceptualized as ax and bx, where x would represent all the 
features  presented  in  both  surfaces  of  sandpaper,  and  a  and  b  would 
represent the unique roughness of each surface. Following this elemental 
approach, it has been noted that alternating preexposure to A and B (i.e., to 
ax and bx) results in the interval between presentations of the distinctive 
features  being  twice  that  of  the  interval  between  presentations  of  the 
common features. This difference would allow the short-term habituation 
mechanism to modulate differentially the salience of the distinctive and the 
common features. For example, the first presentation of stimulus A would 
produce  short-term  habituation  to  the  a  and  the  x  features.  Thus,  when 
stimulus  B  is  subsequently  presented,  the  x  features  would  still  be 
habituated thus commanding relatively little processing, and the available 
(and  supposedly  limited)  processing  resources  would  tend  to  be  fully 
devoted to the distinctive b features. This salience-modulation mechanism 
should  be  particularly  effective  in  alternating  preexposure  schedules  in 

146 
 

G. Rodríguez & R. Angulo 

thus  enhance 

which the interval between the stimulus presentations is very short. Under 
these conditions, the common features are highly preexposed and thus their 
habituation (and the related enhancement of the processing of the distinctive 
features)  should  be  increased.  It  has  been  argued  that  simultaneous 
presentations of the stimuli are precisely the conditions under which this 
mechanism could most readily be engaged (e.g., Mundy et al., 2007; 2009). 
Simultaneous presence of the two stimuli would allow the participants to do 
a series of rapid alternations between them on each preexposure trial. For 
instance,  participants  in  our  simultaneous  condition  might  alternate  very 
rapidly between the stimuli, sampling one surface and then another on each 
preexposure trial. Clearly, this alternation would happen faster than in the 
case  in  which  participants  experience  the  stimuli  sequentially  with  an 
interval of 15 seconds between them.  
Short-term  habituation  would 

the  salience  and 
consequently the processing of the differential roughness of A and B, and it 
would  do  so  more  efficiently  during  simultaneous  than  sequential 
preexposure. But how might this short-lived effect have an enduring impact 
on  stimulus  discriminability  on  the  subsequent  test?  In  answering  this 
question,  it  has  been  suggested  that  short-term  habituation  must  interact 
with some sort of higher-level process, the nature of which is still unclear. 
Different  representational  (e.g.,  Mundy  et  al.,  2009),  attentional  (e.g., 
Mackintosh, 2009; Mundy et al., 2009) or mnemonic (e.g., Mitchell, 2010) 
processes  have  been  proposed  as  candidates.  Although  these  specific 
proposals differ in many ways, they share the central assumption that less 
short-term  habituation  to  the  distinguishing  stimulus  features  results  in  a 
better representation of them, which will enhance stimulus discriminability. 
These  accounts  offer  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the  simultaneous-
sequential effect in humans. However, it is still unclear as to what aspect of 
the supposed interaction between low and high level processes is absent, 
and thus fails to generate the effect, in the case of the animal studies (for 
further  discussion  on  this  matter,  see  Mitchell  &  Hall,  in  press).  Further 
research is required in order to specify the nature of this interaction. At the 
very  least,  the  present  study  has  established  a  simple  and  convenient 
procedure for addressing these and other issues using the tactile modality 
with  humans.  Moreover,  the  simplicity  and  brevity  of  this  task  makes  it 
ideally  suited  to  the  use  of,  for  example,  neuroimaging  techniques  that 
could add to existing knowledge based on behavioural findings. 

 

Tactile Perceptual Learning 

147 

RESUMEN 

La  preexposición  simultánea  a  los  estímulos  favorece  el  aprendizaje 
perceptivo  táctil  en  humanos.  Se  validó  un  nuevo  procedimiento  para 
medir aprendizaje perceptivo con estímulos táctiles y participantes humanos. 
Los participantes recibieron exposición no supervisada a dos superficies de 
lija con diferente rugosidad (A y B). Posteriormente, a través de una prueba 
de juicios de igual-diferente se valoró la habilidad de los participantes para 
discriminar entre los estímulos. Se encontró que la exposición previa a los 
estímulos  produjo  un  aumento  en  la  exactitud  de  los  juicios  “diferentes”. 
Además, este aumento fue mayor cuando los estímulos fueron expuestos de 
forma simutánea que cuando fueron expuestos de forma secuencial. Estos 
resultados  extienden  a  la  modalidad  táctil  otros  resultados  recientes  con 
estímulos visuales y confirman que la exposoción simultánea aumenta los 
efectos de aprendizaje perceptivo. 

REFERENCES 

Angulo, R., & Alonso, G. (2012). Human perceptual learning: The effect of preexposure 
schedule depends on tasks demands. Behavioural Processes, 91, 244–252. 
Dwyer, D. M., Hodder, K. I., & Honey, R. C. (2004). Perceptual learning in humans: Roles 
of pre-exposure schedule, feedback and discrimination assay. Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 57B, 245–259. 
Gibson,  E.  J.  (1969).  Principles  of  perceptual  learning  and  development.  New  York: 
Appleton-Century-Crofts. 
Hall, G (2001).  Perceptual learning: Association and differentiation. In R. R. Mowrer & S. 
B.  Klein  (Eds.),  Handbook  of  contemporary  learning  theories  (pp.  367–407). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
Honey, R.C., & Bateson, P. (1996). Stimulus comparison and perceptual learning: Further 
evidence  and  evaluaton  from  an  imprinting  procedure.  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Experimental Psychology, 49B, 259–269. 
Mackintosh, N.J. (2009). Varieties of perceptual learning. Learning & Behavior, 37, 119-
125. 
Mitchell, C. J. (2010). Attention and memory in human learning. In C. J. Mitchell & E. Le 
Pelley  (Eds.),  Attention  and  associative  learning  (pp.  245–272).  Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press. 
Mitchell,  C.  J.,  &  Hall,  G.  (in  press).  Can  theories  of  animal  discrimination  explain 
perceptual learning in humans? Psychological Bulletin.   
Mundy, M. E., Honey, R. C., & Dwyer, D. M. (2007). Simultaneous presentation of similar 
stimuli  produces  perceptual  learning  in  human  picture  processing.  Journal  of 
Experimental Psychology: Animal Behavior Processes, 33, 124–138. 
Mundy, M. E., Honey, R. C., & Dwyer, D. M. (2009). Superior discrimination between 
similar  stimuli  after  simultaneous  exposure  .  Quarterly  Journal  of  Experimental 
Psychology, 62, 18–25. 
Rodríguez, G., & Alonso, G. (2008). Stimulus comparison in perceptual learning: Roles of 
sensory preconditioning and latent inhibition. Behavioural Processes, 77, 400-404. 

148 
 

G. Rodríguez & R. Angulo 

Rodríguez,  G.,  Blair,  C.A.J.,  &  Hall,  G.  (2008).  The  role  of  comparison  in  perceptual 
learning:  Effects  of  concurrent  exposure  to  similar  stimuli  on  the  perceptual 
effectiveness of their unique features. Learning & Behavior, 36, 75-81. 
Wagner, A. R. (1981). SOP: A model of automatic memory processing in animal behavior. 
In N. E. Spear & R. R. Miller (Eds.), Information processing in animals: Memory 
mechanisms (pp. 5–47). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

 
 
 

 

(Manuscript  received: 7 June 2013; accepted: 25 September 2013) 

