Building Customized 
University-to-Business 
(U2B) Partnerships
George Irvine
UNIVERSITY  OF  DELAWARE

Lisa Verma
LOUISIANA  STATE  UNIVERSITY

Continuing education (CE) units throughout the United States 

have successfully built University-to-Business (U2B) partner-
ships to provide greater value to their community partners 
and to increase revenue for the university. Our experience in 
building U2B partnerships and feedback from our partners—businesses, 
corporations, state agencies, and other organizations—indicates that an 
opportunity currently exists for CE units to leverage their university’s 
comparative strengths in research and teaching to help businesses develop 
their employees to increase efficiency, meet strategic goals, and increase 
employee engagement. As is the case in building any CE area of practice, 
programmatic challenges must be overcome to launch and expand U2B 
programming. This article shares survey results from organizations about 
why they like to partner with universities, provides solutions to the typical 
challenges of building a U2B practice area, and offers a diagnostic tool to 
help CE managers get started in building robust partnerships to achieve 
their outreach and engagement goals.

WHAT IS A U2B PARTNERSHIP? 
In the business community, one frequently hears about business-to-business 
(B2B) or business-to-customer (B2C) relationships. In our experience, a CE 
© 2013 George Irvine, Assistant Director, Organizational Learning Solutions, University of 
Delaware, Newark, DE and Lisa Verma, Director, Custom & On-site Programs, Louisiana State 
University Continuing Education, Baton Rouge, LA

86 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

unit should not adopt a B2B model to serve its partners in the business, 
government and nonprofit sectors because a university operates differently 
than a business in three critical ways: we operate on a different, usually 
slightly longer time scale than a business; we generally operate from an 
educational, mission-oriented rather than profit motive; and we operate 
under different funding structures than a business (subsidized, quasi-
private, nonprofit, for example.) For these reasons, we choose to refer to 
our model as university-to-business (U2B) to more accurately reflect the 
partners involved. 

One can argue that a more accurate name would be university-to-orga-
nization (U2O) partnership, since CE units work not only with businesses 
but also state agencies, nonprofits, and other non-business organizations. 
However, the majority of the revenue generated by CE units involved in 
U2B partnerships comes from business and corporate partners with both 
the need to develop their employees through university-based knowledge 
and the ability to pay for its delivery. 

WHAT IS THE OPPORTUNITY FOR U2B PARTNERSHIPS?
In spring 2013, we surveyed our customers to ask them why they enter into a 
U2B partnership and what they get out of it. The results clearly indicate that 
businesses and organizations enjoy working with a university partner and 
get tangible value out of the training and employee development services 
that they receive. In addition, the survey also highlights how universities 
could better serve their business partners. Here are the key highlights from 
the survey:

•  Surveyed customers rated their overall level of satis-
faction with their university provider of custom and 
on-site programs at 9.5 on a 10-point scale, where 0 is 
very dissatisfied and 10 is very satisfied.

•  Customers gave a variety of reasons as to why they 
selected a university for their educational program-
ming needs, as shown in Table 1. 75 percent said that 
the university was easy to work with while 58 percent  
indicated that price was the motivating reason. We 
would assume that this is due to our reasonably priced 
educational offerings. 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013 

87

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

Table 1: Why businesses work with universities

Qualitative feedback from customers also indicates that a university can 
be an excellent partner for an organization:

•  I have partnered with LSU for years, and keep using 
them, because they meet our needs at a level of excel-
lence that could not be matched anywhere else.

•  The ease in which the development and delivery of 
training programs. The resources the university has at 
its disposal.

•  I appreciate the working relationship. I have gotten 
to know a number of the people with the Division of 
Continuing Education and I can pick up the phone or 
send a quick email and get the answers I need. They 
were also helpful in the grant-writing process.

•  How well the training instructors are received by plant 

folks.

•  Professionalism, the way associates responded to the 
program—engaged with the tools/resources and put 
into practice.

•  The strong business acumen in academia and interest in 
partnering with the business community—our getting 
beyond any corporate bias.

•  The strong research basis, the availability of a variety 

of instructors according to their expertise.

88 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

•  In class collaboration with employees from various local 
companies has really enhanced these courses. The abil-
ity to discuss the content and share how it meshes with 
various industries, or how various companies practice 
similar processes is very interesting and informative.

  Ninety-two percent of our customers have partnered up to 10 times 
in the past five years with a college or university to purchase educational 
programs for their organization. As shown in Table 2, 64 percent of custom-
ers responded that they retain from one to five external vendors in a typical 
year for employee training and development. 27 percent indicated that they 
retain more than 10 vendors. A CE unit can be one of these vendors.

Table 2: Number of external training vendors retained in a year

# 
1 
2 
3 
4 
 

 

Answer 
None 
1-5 
6-10 
More than 10 
Total 

  
  
 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Response 

0 
7 
1 
3 
11 

% 
0 
64 
9 
27 
100 

 
The percentage of training handled in-house rather than outsourced to 
a vendor varied across the surveyed customers. The majority of customers 
(55 percent) handle between one-third and two-thirds of their employee 
training in-house, leaving a significant percentage to be provided by ven-
dors. Only 27 percent, or slightly more than 1 in 4 customers, conduct more 
than two-thirds of their employee training in-house. Customers rated their 
university partner from a number of different perspectives as shown in 
Table 3.

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013 

89

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

Table 3: Ratings of university partner

Customers indicated areas where their educational partner could have 

 
done a better job:

•  Nothing that I can think of at this time.
•  I can honestly say it was/is a pleasant experience and 

there is nothing I would change.

•  In my case, I’m not impressed with the time it takes the 
University to process financial transactions—vendor 
approval, check processing, etc. These transactions can 
be pending for months sometimes with very little to 
no feedback as to the status. I’m used to a much more 
responsive/fast-moving financial team. That can be a 
bit frustrating.

•  Occasionally the instructors could have asked more of 
the participants (less lecture), and we have discussed 
making a change to the program to provide more sup-
port to the group project/presentations. 

90 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

•  We found that some courses were either too broad or 
mislabeled. For example, an “Advanced Excel” course 
was more of an beginning to intermediate, an advanced 
course would include macros, perhaps light SQL, etc. 
‘Technical Writing’ could have focused more on writing 
business cases or similar correspondence for middle 
managers. Luckily these were a small portion of the 
many courses our staff participated in, and may still 
have been beneficial to the junior staff and managers.

 
The return-on-investment (ROI) of a university-provided employee 
development program is a critical measurement for any U2B partnership. 
Customers indicated a high return on their investment in their U2B part-
nership in a number of financial, qualitative, and quantitative ways. 

•  Improved performance by participants was readily ap-

parent to supervisors and managers.

•   ROI = 95 – 100 percent.
We have received training for our employees that makes 
•  them better prepared to deal with daily roadblocks. 
Better-prepared employees and supervisors create an 
environment where we can deliver better service and 
complete jobs in a more timely and safe manner. Giving 
our clients a better product leads to more opportunities 
for future growth.

•  Too early to tell in this round of training but solid reten-

tion numbers from previous training

•  LSU has a great local reputation. So it’s easy to sell my 
employees on the idea of attending a class hosted at LSU 
or using an LSU speaker. Same with persuading my 
company’s owners to spend with LSU. They respect LSU 
and its standing in the community. So, the ROI for me 
as a Training Manager could be measured in increased 
respect for me and my role by recommending we use 
LSU as an educational partner. Financially, the breadth 
of courses available through LSU helps because we have 
been able to schedule management, IT, writing, cus-
tomer service, project management, among others—all 
through a local vendor which means only managing one 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013 

91

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

vendor relationship. (We do use other vendors for some 
specialized topics). But the lion’s share of the outside 
work is through LSU. 

•  I began with my company three years ago as the com-
pany’s first Training Manager. A call to LSU was among 
the first calls I made. The partnership has been ongoing 
since that first phone call. 
•  Excellent value and return.
•  Highly positive feedback from participants, in some 
cases comparing this program favorably with a full 
MS done at another school. One participant has been 
promoted since completing the program (not necessarily 
as a result of attending the program) and has said she 
feels more confident taking on the next level role after 
completing this program.

•  The university relationship allowed us to be approved 
for a workforce commission grant that listed the uni-
versity as an approved partner/vendor. This allowed 
us to register for classes right out of their catalogue, 
vs. working with multiple vendors or create custom 
courses. It also allowed us to send wide swaths of our 
staff through “certification” courses like Project Man-
agement Certification. This was important to us because 
it ensured all staff received basic project management 
knowledge and certification.

Taken as a whole, the survey responses indicate that businesses and 
organizations like to partner with universities because we are easy to deal 
with, provide excellent value for the money, can meet many of their training 
needs in one vendor relationship, generate positive ROI from the training 
provided, and leave them pleased that they entered into a U2B partnership. 

THE CHALLENGES OF BUILDING A U2B PRACTICE AREA 
While the U2B opportunity exists, so do the challenges to succeed in an 
increasingly crowded marketplace. Foremost among these challenges is how 
to start a U2B practice area in a CE unit. Which piece of the programmatic 
puzzle—staff, instructor, product line, marketing, relationship building—is 
the most critical to build first? Other challenges include determining the 

92 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

most effective manner to approach local and regional organizations; edu-
cating business partners about a CE unit’s offerings for their employee 
training needs, particularly if they are used to working with private sector 
training vendors; articulating (without overstating) the ROI from training 
programs; finding subject-matter experts who can relate to the business 
world; working with small and medium-sized businesses as well as big 
businesses with a larger training budget; managing sticker shock if the 
price of a training program is high; establishing replicable processes to 
allow a U2B practice area to grow without undue pains. The following are 
solutions to the key challenges of building a U2B practice area, provided 
in a frequently asked question format: 

What pieces does a CE unit need to have in place to build a viable U2B business? 
Which piece is the most important to grow a U2B practice? 
First, it is critical to have at least a three-quarters time staff person dedicated 
to building a U2B practice area. Establishing relationships with community 
partners takes time, as does devising business processes in the CE unit to 
support U2B programs. Investing in a dedicated staff person is absolutely 
critical to success. Second, it is important to identify a product and/or 
service that will provide real value to an employer or organization. Once 
this product or service is identified, designate at least one staff member 
that has excellent sales and customer service skills. In most cases, the 
potential client does not see the university as a typical sales organization. 
Our experience is that the client views the university more as a partner in 
their employee’s development and training. With these two elements in 
place, it is important that you find excellent subject matter experts (SMEs) 
with good teaching skills who have some industry experience themselves 
and/or who can relate research-based knowledge in an actionable way to 
an employee of a company. Look for these SMEs among the faculty and 
adjuncts of the university/college. Freelance consultants are also an option, 
provided they know that they are working for the CE unit, not themselves. 
The next item to develop is a planned, as opposed to ad hoc marketing 
strategy. In the end (or rather beginning), the most important piece of this 
puzzle is to have the desire to grow your business and revenue through 
meaningful partnerships that add value to both the business community 
and the university.

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013 

93

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

Why do organizations in the private, public and nonprofit sectors select a university 
partner to provide educational programming rather than a training or HR consul-
tant, for example? Do we have to act like a consultancy to meet client expectations 
or is it okay to be “academic” too? 
As previously noted, organizations choose to enter into a partnership for 
a number of different reasons, but primarily for price and ease of partner-
ing. But a university has an advantage in that the university’s core mission 
is to provide the best in research, teaching, and service, not necessarily to 
sell a product or consulting service. Our mission provides us a degree of 
objectivity that distinguishes us as solutions- rather than sales-oriented.

A critical organizational piece for success is customer relationship management 
software and IT. What IT challenges do CE units face as they seek to grow their 
U2B business? 
Resources are critical to success. Developing a healthy U2B “ecosystem” to 
include IT/software is essential. Take stock of what you already have and 
what you must add. Do you have a robust customer relationship (CRM) 
tool, an enrollment management system (EMS), and/or a content manage-
ment system (CMS)? In terms of marketing, are you positioned to use social 
media in addition to traditional marketing channels?

How do you find your customers? 
We find new clients by meeting with local and regional industry associations 
(chambers of commerce, Society of Human Resources Managers, business 
councils, etc.). In some cases, a new client is a client from the past. Many 
of our customers are current or repeat customers. 

How do you ensure that your educational content meets your customers’ needs?
In the case of LSU, we offer more than 200 face-to-face professional develop-
ment courses that we are willing to bring to the customer and to customize. 
When meeting with potential partners, we ask them about their employee 
“pain point”—the thing that prevents them from achieving their training 
goals. We ask probing questions to understand their problems instead of 
offering an off-the-shelf training solution. This is an important piece of the 
partnering process; well-formulated questions show a competent and caring 
university partner. Once there is agreement about the organization’s needs 
and our ability to meet them, we bring together our subject-matter expert 
and the client for a more in-depth conversation about what the training 

94 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

should accomplish. The process does not always result in a “sale,” but it 
gives us more information about an organization’s or industry’s needs and 
helps us think about potential resources for meeting them.

What “ecosystem” exists to help a CE unit grow its U2B business? 
Every university has resources that can be called on to support successful 
U2B partnerships. This ecosystem will be unique to a university, rang-
ing from an office of career services that has excellent partnerships with 
companies that hire university graduates to the university’s customer and 
other support systems. External resources could include local and regional 
workforce and economic development advisory boards, chambers of com-
merce, and departments of labor as well as relationships with national 
professional organizations such as UPCEA and ACHE. The important thing 
is to think about the ecosystem in which your CE unit exists. How can you 
tap its resources? 

When are you a consultant and when are you a university educator? How do you 
know which hat to wear and where do you draw the line? 
This should be decided from the start. In addition to providing training and 
development, it will take a considerable increase in time and staff to provide 
consulting services such as conducting needs assessment, personality as-
sessments, business coaching, designing performance appraisal systems, 
identifying job competencies, etc. In the end, we are not HR consultants, 
and our partners do not expect that of us, though it is helpful to be familiar 
with strategic human resource consulting firms through their websites and 
the websites of the American Society for Training and Development and 
the Society for Human Resource Management.

Can U2B work with small and medium-sized businesses, or is it only for big busi-
nesses with large training budgets? 
Small and medium-sized businesses typically do not have large enough 
training budgets to support customized employee development programs. 
However it is easier to train a smaller staff than a larger one, so be prepared 
to provide specific skills training in smaller and modestly priced portions 
so that when a company grows and its employees’ training needs become 
more complex, you are ready to help them.  Another option is to provide 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013 

95

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

one-on-one employee coaching on communication, budgeting, or HTML 
skills, which can help small businesses develop their employees without 
spending a lot of time and money sending him/her to a semester length 
university course.  

How can you manage sticker shock with respect to the cost of training? 
In any proposal it is important to emphasize what the client receives from 
the employee development program. Price is a function of value provided. 
If the value provided is high, then the impact of pricing will be manageable. 

What is the best way to put replicable processes in place to allow a U2B practice 
area to grow without undue pains? 
The U2B team must map the process it creates. Process mapping helps 
identify redundancies and time wasters. Once mapped, processes are more 
easily improved and replicated. It is as important to diagnose the reasons 
for failure as to highlight successes.

ACTION ITEM: U2B DIAGNOSTIC
Increasingly, universities expect CE units to return additional revenue 
to the central campus, and a robust U2B program can be a source of that 
revenue. The first step in building a U2B program is assessing its current 
state. To this end, we have developed a U2B Diagnostic (see Appendix A) 
to help CE managers to determine the current strength of their program. 
Whether a CE unit has an established U2B program or is just starting out, 
the U2B Diagnostic offers focus areas where resources can be allocated to 
grow a U2B program. 

The U2B programs at our institutions (University of Delaware and 
Louisiana State University) are an important part of our noncredit program 
portfolio.  Our U2B programs contribute between a quarter and a third 
of our CE unit’s annual gross revenue and yield greater net revenue than 
open-enrollment programming.  More importantly, our U2B programs 
extend our university’s knowledge to the broader community and have a 
positive impact on workforce and economic development. 

96 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

APPENDIX 1: U2B DIAGNOSTIC—HOW STRONG IS YOUR U2B? 
Developed by George Irvine, University of Delaware, girvine@udel.edu, and Lisa 
Verma, LSU

This diagnostic evaluates the strength of your University-to-Business (U2B) 
program. Based on your score, your program will fall into one of four 
categories. The diagnostic can help you identify U2B practice areas that 
you might want to focus on to strengthen your program. Rate each of the 
statements on a 5 - 1 scale:
 5-Strongly agree, 4-Agree, 3-Neutral, 2-Disagree, 1-Strongly disagree.
Circle your response, total your points, add the points together at the 
bottom of the last column. Divide the total by ten (10.) This is your U2B 
Strength Number. 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013 

97

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

OVERALL

I routinely network with 
organizations at regional 
events (Chambers of Com-
merce, conferences, etc.) 
I have an organizational 
advisory committee to 
ensure programmatic 
alignment.
I seek out new content 
matter experts on and off 
campus.
I know who my competi-
tion is, their programs 
and services, their price 
and their comparative 
advantage.
I believe revenue is a func-
tion of value provided to 
the organizational partner.
I continuously improve 
my employees’ sales, re-
sponsive customer service, 
and process improvement 
skills. 
I calculate my delivery 
costs and my desired 
profit margin on each 
program so I can analyze 
Return on Investment.

I share revenue with 
critical university depart-
ments/offices.
I use some form of 
customer relationship 
management software. 
I am open to partnering 
with other university or 
private sector organiza-
tions to meet client needs.

If you do NOT have a 
dedicated U2B staffer, 
divide your score in half.

5

Strongly
Agree

4

Agree

3
Neu-
tral

2
Dis-
agree

1

Strongly 
Disagree

Point

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

2

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

Total 
Average 
Revised 
Average

98 

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013

BUILDING CUSTOMIZED UNIVERSITY-TO-BUSINESS (U2B) PARTNERSHIPS

1 to 2: Your U2B has room to grow
You have the opportunity to create or refashion your U2B program by in-
corporating best practices from peer institutions. Meet with business and 
organizational leaders in your region to find out their employee develop-
ment needs. Determine your CE unit’s core strengths and play to these in 
content development and marketing. Consider finding a strategic partner 
on campus to leverage their comparative strength. Create a U2B manager’s 
position if you do not already have one. Train your staff in customer service, 
organizational partnering, and program management skills. 
2 to 3: Your U2B is a little robust
You have some good things going in your U2B programming. Consider 
focusing greater effort on those statements where you scored a 3 or lower. 
Have your U2B manager (or staffer) research best U2B practices, talk with 
peers in the field, vendors who sell relevant products/services, HR con-
sultancies that provide similar services etc. As you strengthen these areas, 
they should complement your existing strengths and move you up in your 
average score. 
3 to 4: Your U2B is moderately robust
You are doing well but could do better to provide greater value to your 
customers and generate more revenue. Look at the statements where you 
scored 4 or lower and consider how to raise that score. More than likely it 
is just a few U2B practice areas that need addressing, such as CRM or staff 
development. Perhaps strategic partnering with another university unit 
on campus would make sense to grow your capabilities and market reach.
4 to 5: Your U2B is highly robust
You are doing very well in your U2B programming and should share your 
best practices with your peers. But don’t rest on your laurels. Ask yourself, 
“What would it take to double my U2B revenue and value provided?” Do 
you need more staff, more content, more marketing muscle? What is the 
next great topic that organizations will need to know and can you provide 
it before anyone else does? Is there a Blue Ocean strategy to follow (low 
competition with high returns due to unique content/product) vs. the 
Red Ocean strategy to follow (high competition with low returns due to 
routine content/product)? Can you extend your market reach by going 
online perhaps?  

CONTINUING HIGHER EDUCATION REVIEW, Vol. 77, 2013 

99

