RESEARCH PAPERS

EFFECTIVENESS OF MUTUAL LEARNING APPROACH IN THE 

ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT OF B.ED STUDENTS IN 

LEARNING OPTIONAL II ENGLISH

By

EVANGELIN ARULSELVI

Associate Professor, Dammam University, Saudi Arabia.

ABSTRACT

The present study aims at finding out the effectiveness of Mutual learning approach over the conventional method in 
learning English optional II among B.Ed students. The randomized pre-test, post test, control group and experimental 
group design was employed. The B.Ed students of the same college formed the control and experimental groups. Each 
group consists of 25 learners. The 't' test analysis reveals the experimental fact that mutual learning has effectiveness in 
learning English better than the conventional method. There is a wide scope for the application of mutual learning 
approach in learning English among B.Ed students.
Keywords: Mutual Learning Approach, Learning by Teaching, Content exchange, Information sharing, Increased self 
confidence.

INTRODUCTION

The field of language teaching is very broad and extensive. 
The teaching process and instructional procedure of English 
are different from other subjects. English teaching has two 
main  areas.  Language  teaching  and  literature  teaching. 
These areas are related and complementary to each other. 
But their nature is quite different from each other. The two 
areas have their own form and methods of learning. The one 
year Bachelor degree of Education (B.Ed) program aims to 
provide  in  depth  knowledge  in  the  area  of  language 
teaching, developing professional competencies along with 
relevant  skills,  designed  to  prepare  students  to  face  the 
challenges of 21  century in the field of educational break 
through.

st

English is taught as an Optional subject in the B.Ed course 
and  its  curriculum  is  designed  with  a  view  to  introduce 
students  a  detailed  content  cum  practicum  of  English 
Language  Teaching.  In  the  rural  colleges,  most  of  the 
students who take Optional English I and II have a strong 
back ground of their mother tongue and they struggle hard 
to understand and obtain the course. The  researcher  has  
identified the need for a professional development activity 
to  support  the  student  teachers'  understanding  and  to 
relate  each other during intellectual experiences. She has 
decided to conduct a very little research in the strategy of 

teaching learning process and it has been conducted to 
have  the  desired  impact  on  teacher  understanding.   
Instructional  methods  are  used  by  teachers  to  create 
learning  environments  and  to  specify  the  nature  of  the 
activity in which the teacher and learner will be involved 
during  the  lesson,  and  the  researcher  selected  Mutual 
learning as a teaching strategy for the purpose.

 

 

learning  by 

In  professional  education, 
teaching 
designates currently the method by Jean-Pol Martin that 
allows pupils and students to prepare and to teach lessons, 
or parts of lessons. Learning by teaching means selecting a 
particular topic in the content and exchanging knowledge 
on the  selected topic and  to improve coordination and 
decision  making. 
It  should  not  be  confused  with 
presentations or lectures by students, as students not only 
convey  a  certain  content,  but  also  choose  their  own 
methods  and  didactic  approaches 
teaching 
classmates that subject. Neither should it be confused with 
tutoring, because the teacher has intensive control of, and 
gives  support  for,  the  learning  process  in  learning  by 
teaching as against other methods.

in 

Usually  student  teachers  were  taught  simply  with  lecture 
methods and they are given classes to teach and left to 
get  on  with  it.  Mentor  teachers  also  observe  student 
teachers teaching their classes. The researcher made a 

i-manager’s Journal o  English Language Teaching  Vol.

n

,

 3

   No. 3

l

   July - September 

l

2013

25

RESEARCH PAPERS

change in the instructional method in which the students 
work in small groups. Every individual student in the groups 
activate and share valid information of the topic selected 
for the research. Through the sharing of information and 
different ideas, everyone has the opportunity to learn more. 
Thus, the parties involved in a difficult situation may end up 
changing  their  perspectives,  leading  to  new  and  fresh 
outcomes. By eliminating the class division of authoritative 
teacher  and  passive  audience,  an  emotive  solidarity  is 
obtained. Student work is more motivated, efficient, active 
and intensive due to lowered inhibitions and an increased 
sense  of  purpose.  Students  may  perform  many  routine 
tasks, otherwise unnecessarily carried out by the instructor. 
Next to subject-related knowledge students gain important 
key  qualifications 
teamwork,  planning  abilities, 
reliability,  presentation  and  moderation  skills  and    self-
confidence.  Operating  this  model,  there  is  increased 
understanding  and  trust  with  the  reduced  need  for 
defensiveness.
·Increased  understanding,  reduced  conflict  and 

like 

defensiveness.
·Increased trust.
·Fewer self-fulfilling, seal-sealing processes.
·Increased learning.
·Increased effectiveness.
·Increased quality of work life.
Mutual  learning  is  used  essentially  in  a  small  group 
instructional technique. For example, a class 30 students 
can be divided into six groups, five in each group and all 
the members of each group study together, share ideas 
and  receive  recognition.  When  group  of  students  work 
together for a common purpose, they are dependent on 
one  another's  efforts  to  achieve  that  purpose.  This  inter 
dependence motivates and encourages the individuals to 
share whatever they need to succeed.

Mutual learning has a wide  application in foreign countries 
and  its  importance  is  realised  in  India  in  recent  times. 
Mutual  learning  approach  provides  opportunities  for 
intellectual,  psychological  and  social  development  of 
learners and enables all the learners in the class room work 
together and find solutions to the problem of team work. In 

the  present  study,  an  attempt  is  made  to  find  out  the 
effectiveness  of  Mutual  learning  approach  among  B.Ed 
students  in  learning  Optional  II  English.  In  the  Mutual 
learning teams positive interdependence is structured into 
the group task activities and members are responsible for 
each  other's  success.  Individual  accountability  is  an 
expected outcome. Communication skills are identified, 
directly  taught,  and  expected  to  be  used  by  all  group 
members.  There  are  designated 
roles  with  shared 
leadership assigned and monitored by the group and the 
instructor.

Review of Related Literature

Tone Bratteteig, 1997,  Mutual learning between users and 
designers  is  an  important  part  of  participatory  systems 
design. Examples from a mutual learning process are used 
to discuss problems that highlight important principles for 
mutual learning. The process of mutual learning benefits 
from  being  based  on  theories  about  learning  and 
teaching,  in  particular  principles  of  problem  oriented 
pedagogy.  Mutual  learning  is  an  important  part  of 
participatory design. Mutual learning means that users and 
designer learn from each other during the design process, 
and both qualify themselves with respect to the systems 
development  process  they  are  involved  in.  The  mutual 
learning 
the 
application area and the work that the future computer 
system is supposed to support, as well as technology and 
possible applications of new technology.

typically  deals  with  knowledge  about 

Barannik  N.S,  Gorbatyuk  V.F.  2012,  investigated  the 
characteristics of mutual learning in the study of teaching 
high school students a new and difficult topic, “Basics of 
multimedia learning”. The experiment showed that the use 
of peer education dramatically increased the efficiency of 
learning  and  contributed  to  the  development  of  self-
organization and learning in the student group. Application 
of the ideas of meta-learning project has led to targeted 
teaching  of  students  who  have  acquired  a  deep  and 
useful  knowledge,  and  formed  the  ability  to  solve  real 
problems that are encountered in life. As a result, the entire 
study group met in full all of the seven tasks on the subject, 
and has been certified and passed the examination.

Fran Martin, 2007, investigated the pilot research project 

26

i-manager’s Journal o  English Language Teaching  Vol.

n

,

 3

   No. 3

l

   July - September 

l

2013

RESEARCH PAPERS

which  explored  the  process  of  mutual  learning  and 
displacement spaces through a study visit course to the 
Gambia. The course, which ran from November 2006 to 
April  2007,  sets  out  to  challenge  teachers'  world  views 
about development and global partnerships. A model was 
devised  to  show  the  key  elements  of  experiential  and 
mutual learning; this was informed by earlier courses and 
theories  of  learning  drawn  from  the  literature.  Interviews, 
evaluations  and  group  discussions  of  the  10  course 
members are analysed for key themes and presented in 
relation to the course structure and the model. Evidence at 
this  stage  suggests  displacements  spaces  are 
uncomfortable and challenging but beneficial because of 
the security provided by the mutual learning. This process 
enabled the majority of teachers to challenge and revise 
their world views. 
Michelle Grenier, Ben Dyson, & Pat Yeaton (2005) found that 
Mutual    learning  can  be  both  reciprocal  and  inclusive, 
offering  students  the  opportunity  to  be  contributing 
members of the learning community by providing a safe 
environment for students of all abilities. Whether a child is 
identified as “typical,” “at-risk," or “gifted,” Mutual learning 
encourages  respect  and  learning  between  peers.  This 
article depicts a classroom scenario in mutual   learning 
that includes a student with cerebral palsy. Several keys to 
implementing  mutual  learning  are  described,  including 
planning, assessment, and problem-solving skills. Although 
implementation  may  be  time-consuming  and  require 
practice, the use of cooperative learning helps all students 
attain social, cognitive, and physical skill development.

Nedergaard,  Peter  (2009)  says  that  learning  changes  in 
language-constituted relations to others. This argument is 
elaborated into a model for mutual learning. It deals with 
the  conflictual  views  on  the  size  and  character  of  the 
learning  processes  of  the  EES  in  recent  studies  and 
proposes a new methodological path to investigate the 
mutual 
learning  processes  based  upon  a  social 
constructivist  approach.  This  study  concluded  that  there 
was  a  significant  effect  concerning  the  use  of  Mutual 
learning on students achievement.
Michal  Rosen-Zvi  and  Wolfgang  Kinzel  (2002)  say  that 
Mutual  learning  of  a  pair  of  tree  parity  machines  with 

continuous  and  discrete  weight  vectors 
is  studied 
analytically. The analysis is based on a mapping procedure 
that maps the mutual learning in tree parity machines onto 
mutual learning in noisy perceptions. The stationary solution 
of the mutual learning in the case of continuous tree parity 
machines depends on the learning rate where a phase 
transition from partial to full synchronization is observed. In 
the discrete case the learning process is based on a finite 
increment and a full synchronized state is achieved in a 
finite number of steps. The synchronization of discrete parity 
machines is introduced in order to construct an ephemeral 
key-exchange protocol. The dynamic learning of a third 
tree parity machine which is an attacker that tries to imitate 
one of the two machines while the two still update their 
weight  vectors 
the 
synchronization times of the naive attacker and the flipping 
attacker  recently  introduced  are  analyzed.  All  analytical 
results are found to be in good agreement with simulation 
results. 

is  also  analyzed. 

In  particular, 

Gail  Greig  (2004)  presents  a  study  conducted  by  the 
practitioners in the community hospital of Scotland. Mutual 
learning  is  tried  between  general  practitioners  with 
community hospital beds and consultants in Scotland. The 
group  found  that  Mutual  learning  is  a  very  effective 
instructional technique for applying innovative treatments 
to the patients admitted in the hospital. 

to 

Chung-Te  Ting  and  Chin-Wei  Huang  (2010)  Taiwan's 
international  business  and  leisure  hotels  have  created 
specific,  divergent  service  operating  systems  to  gain 
competitive advantage based on their distinctive target 
markets. Given that hotel operators frequently benchmark 
direct  competitors 
improve  on  performance, 
researchers  have  suggested  that  hotel  operators  use  a 
mutual  learning  strategy  by  benchmarking  strategic 
techniques from hotels in disparate market segments. This 
study evaluates the effectiveness of the suggested mutual 
learning strategy between Taiwan's business hotels and its 
leisure hotels, using the Different Systems model of data 
envelopment  analysis 
to  examine  potential 
improvements in efficiency. On the other hand, more than 
half of the leisure hotels in this sample would be able to 
achieve  best  practices 
learning 

the  mutual 

(DEA) 

from 

i-manager’s Journal o  English Language Teaching  Vol.

n

,

 3

   No. 3

l

   July - September 

l

2013

27

RESEARCH PAPERS

approach. 

Objectives of the study

The  major  objective  of  the  study  is  to  find  out  whether 
Mutual  learning  approach  is  more  effective  than  the 
traditional approach.

Selection of the Control Group 

The control group consisted of 25 learners studying in the 
same class of the same college. The group was exposed to 
the traditional method instruction and no novel treatment 
was given to this group.

Hypotheses

Research Tools

I.

II 

There exists no significant difference between the pre 
and post mean scores of the  Experimental group.

The Control and Experimental groups do not differ in 
their academic achievement  Scores. 

Methodology

In the present study the non-randomised control group pre 
test,  post  test  design  was  adopted.  The  groups  were 
formed according the requirements of the Mutual Learning 
Approach.

Sample Selection

the 

two  groups  were  equal 

In  the  present  study,  the  experimental  group  and  the 
control group were selected. The two groups were selected 
from a College of Education in Namakkal District. Bachelor 
of  Education  students  were  considered  for  this  purpose. 
Although 
terms  of 
achievement scores, the subjects in each group were not 
equal and they varied in terms of their academic abilities. 
The composition of the mutual learning teams were made 
on the basis of the achievement scores of the learners. The 
subjects  of  the  two  groups  were  selected  and  the 
application of randomness led to the classification of the 
Control and Experimental groups.

in 

Selection of the Experimental Group

The  Experimental  group  is  formed  on  the  basis  of  the 
academic  achievement  scores  of  the  students.  The  25 
learners were grouped in to 5 teams with 5 members in 
each  team  based  on  the  scores  of  the  first  term 
examination of the English language. The first five highest 
scorers formed the first members of the five teams  and the 
remaining scorers were distributed to each team as per the 
procedure  of  distribution.  This  sort  of  distribution  of  the 
subjects  would  enable  achieving  considerable  equality 
among the teams in each group, but as the same time, 
heterogeneity of learner ability within a team is maintained 
as per the requirement of the Mutual learning approach.

The investigator's self made achievement tests were  used 
for the pre-tests and post-tests of both the groups. The same 
question paper was used for both the groups to evaluate 
the  pupils'  skills  in  Optional  II  English  covering  selected 
topics  of  the  content.  At  the  beginning  of  the  test,  the   
instructions of answering was given and the subjects were 
asked to write the  answer. The time allotted for answering 
was one hour.

Both the groups were administered a pre test in which the 
previous  knowledge  of  the  students  were  assessed. 
Advanced  Grammar  in  Optional  II  English  was  the  unit 
selected for the administration of the pre test. In order to 
increase  the  reliability  and  validity  of  the  Post  test 
performance and to eliminate the testing effect of the pre 
test, other two achievement tests were constructed. These 
tests were a slight modification of the Pre test. Same type of 
questions and same number of questions were used for 
these two tests. The procedures adopted in developing the 
pre test tool were employed while constructing these tools 
also.  Other  important  units  like  Teaching  Vocabulary, 
Reference and Study skills were selected for administering 
the other two tests.

Test Validity

The content of both the test was validated by a team of 
English  language  specialists.  The  team  validated  the 
content and   instructions of the test, the relevance of the 
questions to the content, its suitability of attaining the goals, 
number and arrangement of questions and  time allotted. 
The remarks and suggestions of the team were taken into 
consideration  and  the  researcher  made  the  necessary 
modification before its application.

Test Reliability

A pilot group of 30 students were randomly selected from 
the population of the study who were excluded from the 
sample.  Test-retest  method  was  used  to  check  the 

28

i-manager’s Journal o  English Language Teaching  Vol.

n

,

 3

   No. 3

l

   July - September 

l

2013

RESEARCH PAPERS

reliability. First a test was administered to them and it was 
repeated on the same group after two weeks. The reliability 
correlation coefficient of the tests  result  were calculated 
using Pearson correlation method. The obtained value of 
the  Pre  test  was  0.753  which  was  an  indication  of  its 
reliability. The obtained value of the Post   tests were 0.78 
and 0.81 respectively.

Test Administration Procedure

for 

II  English  was 

the  unit  selected 

Both the experimental  group and the control group were 
administered a pre test in which the previous knowledge of 
the  students  were  assessed.  Advanced  Grammar  in 
Optional 
the 
administration of the pre test. Other two achievement Post 
tests  were  also  constructed.  These  tests  were    slight 
modification of the Pre test. Same type of questions and 
same number of questions were used for these two tests. 
The procedures adopted in developing the pre test tool 
were  employed  while  constructing  these  tests.  Other 
important units like Teaching Vocabulary, Reference and 
Study skills were selected for administering the other two 
tests.

Results and Discussion

The  results  of  the  study  are  presented  in  Tables  1-6  with 
interpretation.

A. Pre test was administered to both the control and the 
experimental groups. Both the groups do not differ in their 
Pre-test  mean  achievement  scores  as  testified  by  the  't' 
value is 0.16  which is not significant at 0.05 level. 

Group

Control

Experimental

N

25
25

M

46.2
45.7

SD

10.54
10.42

Table 1. Pre Test – Comparison between Control and 

Experimental groups

Test

Pre Test
Post Test 1

N

25
25

M
45.7
68

SD

10.42
9.6

‘t’

0.16

‘t’

7.87

Table 2. Comparison of the Pre test and Post test-1 of the 

Experimental Group

Test

Pre Test
Post Test 1

N

25
25

M

68
70

SD

9.6
9.0

‘t’

0.38

*Significant at 0.01 level 

Table 3. Comparison of the Post test I and Post test-II of the 

Experimental Group

Test

Pre Test
Post Test 1

N

25
25

M
45.7
70

SD

10.42
9.0

‘t’

8.83

Table 4. Comparison of the Pre test  and Post test-II of the 

Experimental Group

Group

Control

Experimental

N

25
25

M

52.4
84.6

SD

7.6
9.16

‘t’

13.52

Table 5. Post Test – 1 Comparison between Control group and 

Experimental group

Group

Control

Experimental

N

25
25

M

59.8
87.2

SD

6.8
8.6

‘t’

12.5

Table 6. Post Test – II Comparison between Control and 

Experimental group

B. The overall conclusion is that the homogeneity of the two 
groups is maintained during the Pre-test period. This proves 
the  true  composition  of  the  control  and  experimental 
group.

Achievement scores of the Pre test   and Post test I of the 
experimental group were compared.   The experimental 
group shows significant difference between its pre- test and 
post-test  -1  mean  achievement  scores  (  ‘t'  =  7.87, 
significant  at  0.01 
the 
experimental group is found better in the post-test  -1 when 
compared with its Pre-test performance. This reveals the 
effectiveness of Mutual learning approach.

level).  The  performance  of 

Achievement scores of Post test 1 and Post test II of the 
experimental group were compared and there exists no 
significant difference between these two scores by the 't' 
value  0.38  which  is  not  significant  at  0.01  level  of 
significance. 
the  academic 
performance of the experimental group  in Post test I and 
Post test II is equally better and the experimental group is 
slightly better in Post test II when it is compared with post test 
1 performance.

is  observed 

that 

It 

Achievement scores of the Pre test and Post test II of the 
experimental  group  were  compared  and  there  exists 
significant difference between these two scores by the 't' 
value 8.83 which is significant at 0.01 level of significance. 
The group shows better performance in Post test II than in its 
Pre test performance. This shows the effectiveness of the 
Mutual  learning  approach  in  enhancing  the  academic 
achievement of the learners.

i-manager’s Journal o  English Language Teaching  Vol.

n

,

 3

   No. 3

l

   July - September 

l

2013

29

RESEARCH PAPERS

Achievement scores of the   Post test I of the control and 
experimental  groups  were  compared  and  there  exists 
significant difference between these two scores by the 't' 
value 13.52 which is significant at 0.01 level. From the table 
it is inferred that the experimental group excels the control 
group  in  academic  performance.  This  indicates  the 
effectiveness  of  the  Mutual  learning  approach  over  the 
traditional methods of Instruction.

Achievement scores of the Post test II of the control and 
experimental  groups  were  compared  and  there  exists 
significant difference between these two scores by the 't' 
value 12.5 which is significant at 0.01 level. From the table it 
is inferred that the experimental group excels the control 
group  in  academic  performance.  This  indicates  the 
effectiveness  of  the  Mutual  learning  approach  over  the 
traditional methods of Instruction. 

The  results  of  the  comparisons  clearly  stated  that  both 
hypotheses are rejected.

Findings of the Study

The  present  study  clearly  reveals  the  effectiveness  of 
Mutual learning approach over the conventional method 
of instruction. It is found that Mutual learning approach is 
more effective than the traditional approach in enhancing 
the  academic  achievement  of  the  learners.  The  results 
indicate  that  Mutual  learning  structures  can  be  used 
successfully for students of diverse abilities. Mutual learning 
structures  can  be  easily  used  as  a  modification  to 
instruction  with  no  extra  time  or  effort  required  of  the 
teacher. One lesson plan using Mutual learning structures 
has  built 
the 
heterogeneous  class  groupings,  which  eliminates  the 
requirement for several different plans to meet the needs of 
all students. The following qualities were developed among 
students while using Mutual learning method.
·Increased  understanding,  reduced  conflict  and 

tutoring  and  support  within 

in  peer 

defensiveness.
·Increased trust.
·Fewer self-fulfilling, seal-sealing processes.
·Increased learning.
·Increased effectiveness.
·Increased quality of work life

·Individual Accountability
·Equal Participation
·Simultaneous Interaction
·Positive Inter dependance
Based  on  the  findings  and  conclusion  discussed,  the 
researcher suggests the following implications.
·Teachers should encourage Mutual learning method 
where students interact with each other to acquire and 
practise the elements of a subject matter and to meet 
common learning goals.

· Mutual learning approach help students to carryout 
active  learning  activities  which  help  them  develop 
their potentials.

·In Mutual learning teams, positive interdependence is 
structured into the group task activities and members 
are  responsible  for  each  other's  success.  Individual 
accountability is an expected outcome.

·The  group  regularly  processes  how  they  are  working 
together  and  adjusts  their  personal  and  group 
behaviours accordingly.

·There was increased Achievement, Increase in Positive 
Relationships, Greater Intrinsic Motivation, Higher Self-
Esteem, More “On-Task” Behavior, and Better Attitudes 
Toward Teaching and learning.

Reference Cited

[1]. Barannik N.S, Gorbatyuk V.F. (2012). Mutual learning as 
a modification of Guys Training,   Fundamental Research, 
Scientific Journal, ISSN 1812-7339 

[2]. Greig,  G.  (2004).  Mutual  learning  between  general 
practitioners  with  community  hospital  beds  and 
consultants in Scotland, Work Based Learning in Primary 
Care, pp.2:338-51.

]3]. Fran Martin, (2007), Mutual Learning: The impact of a 
study  visit  course  on 
teachers'  knowledge  and 
understanding of global partnerships. University of Exeter, 
School of Education and Lifelong Learning. 

[4].  Chung  –  Te  Ting  and  Chin-  Wei  Huang  (2010). 
Measuring the Effectiveness of Mutual Learning for Taiwan's 
Tourist Hotels with the DEA Approach, CQ Cornell Hospitality.

[5]. Jean-Pol  Martin,  Guido  Oebel  (2007):  Learning  by 

30

i-manager’s Journal o  English Language Teaching  Vol.

n

,

 3

   No. 3

l

   July - September 

l

2013

RESEARCH PAPERS

Teaching, 12, 2007, 4-2, (ISBN 1342-6575)

[6]. Michal  Rosen-Zvi,  woltgang  kinzu  (2002).  Mutual 
learning  in  a  tree  parity  machine  and  its  application  to 
cryptography. 

[7]. Michelle  Grenier,  Ben  Dyson,  &  Pat  Yeaton,  (2005). 
Cooperative  Learning 
Includes  Students  with 
Disabilities, Journal of Physical Education, Recreation and 
Dance. 

that 

[8]. Nedergaard,  Peter.  (2009).  The  analysis  of  mutual 
learning processes in the European  employment strategy: 
a  social  constructivist  approach.  Paper  No:4  ,  2005,  A 
Journal  of  International  Center  for  Business  and  Politics, 
Copenhagen Business School.

[9]. Tone  Bratteteig.  (1997).    Mutual  learning-  Enabling 
cooperation on systems design.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Dr. Evangelin Arulselvi is currently working as an Associate Professor in English in Dammam University, Saudi Arabia. She has a 
brilliant academic career and she has been teaching for the past 23 years. She earned her Master degrees in English, Public 
Administration, Counselling Psychotherapy and Education and her Ph.D in Education English at Periyar University, Salem. She 
teaches  Research  Methodology,  Teaching  Methodology,  Teaching  Strategies  and  English  Language  Assessment.  She  has 
obtained “Best Teacher” Award and “Best Principal” award. She has written 15 Books on English Education which are used by 
Education universities and many Education colleges in India and abroad. She has written several research articles in the leading 
International Journals and presented research papers in International conferences. She has supervised more than 40 M.Phil 
scholars of Education all awarded and supervising many Ph.D scholars of Education and English.

i-manager’s Journal o  English Language Teaching  Vol.

n

,

 3

   No. 3

l

   July - September 

l

2013

31

