RESEARCH PAPERS

TO STUDY THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN POSITIVE TEACHING 

ATTITUDE AND EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE OF B.ED. 

TRAINEES IN AURANGABAD CITY

By

FARHATUNNISA BEGUM *                                                            SUHAIL AHMED KHAN **

* Research Scholar, Marathwada College of Education, Aurangabad.

** Principal, Marathwada College of Education, Aurangabad.

ABSTRACT

It is said that our act is geared by our emotions, therefore human functioning is determined by emotions and emotions 
themselves  are  considered  as  higher  order  intelligence.  Emotional  intelligence  is  said  as,  the  ability  to  perceive 
accurately, appraise and express emotions, generate feeling that facilitate thoughts and ability to regulate emotion to 
promote growth. This paper is an attempt to know the relationship between positive teaching attitudes of B.Ed. trainees 
with their emotional intelligence. The study is done on the sample of 300 B.Ed. trainees of Aurangabad City. The tool used 
to measure teaching attitude is 'Teaching Attitude Scale', prepared by Dr. S.A. Ahluwalia & 'Rogan Emotional Intelligence 
Test', prepared by Prof. Roquiya, Zainuddin & Anjum Ahmed. The findings reveal that, teaching attitude of B.Ed. Trainee is 
of moderate level where emotional intelligence level is also normal. The relationship between positive teaching attitude 
and emotional intelligence is moderate.

Keywords: Positive Teaching Attitude, Emotional Intelligence.

INTRODUCTION

Human  functioning  is  determined  by  emotions  and 
emotions  themselves  are  considered  as  higher  order 
intelligence.  Needless  to  say  it  is  one’s  emotional 
response  to  a  particular  situation  that  makes  the 
difference,  and  therefore  the  role  of  emotion  in  every 
aspect of life is now empirically proven. 

Different people define emotions in different ways. Some 
make a distinction between emotions and feelings saying 
that a feeling is the response part of the emotion and that 
an  emotion  includes  the  situation  or  experience,  the 
interpretation,  the  perception,  and  the  response  or 
feeling related to the experience of a particular situation.  
For the purpose of this article, the authors use the terms 
interchangeably (Mary K. 2002).

John D. (Jack) Mayer says, “Emotions operate on many 
levels.  They  have  a  physical  aspect  as  well  as  a 
psychological  aspect.  Emotions  bridge  the  thought, 
feeling, and action and operate in every part of a person, 
they affect many aspects of a person, and the person is 
affected by many aspects of the emotions.”

Dr.  Maurice  Elias  says,  “Emotions  are  human  beings' 
warning systems as to what is really going on around them. 
Emotions are our most reliable indicators of how things are 
going on in our lives. Emotions help to keep us on the right 
track by making sure that we are led by more than the 
mental/  intellectual  faculties  of  thought,  perception, 
reason, and memory.”

th

Emotional Intelligence is considered nowadays as a new 
concept although its roots can be traced back to the 20  
Century.  The  famous  psychologist  E.L.Thorndike through 
his  concept  of  social  intelligence  laid  down  a  solid 
foundation  of  the  essence  of  emotional  intelligence  in 
1920.  The  psychologists  Salovey  and  Mayer  originally 
coined the term 'Emotional Intelligence' in 1990. However, 
Daniel Goleman popularized it in 1995. Goleman defined 
emotional  intelligence  as  'Understanding  one's  own 
feelings,  empathy  for  the  feelings  of  others  and  the 
regulation  of  emotion  in  a  way  that  enhances  living 
'(www.free-management-ebooks.com).

Mayor & Salovey in 1990 also defined it as “The ability to 
perceive  accurately,  appraise  &  express  emotions, 
generate  feelings  that  facilitate  thoughts  and  ability  to 

i-manager’s Journal o

n Educational

 Psychology, Vol.

 8

   No. 3 l

 November 2014 - January 2015

l

43

RESEARCH PAPERS

regulate emotions to promote the growth. 

Positive Teaching Attitude

teaching  attitude 

“An attitude is essentially a form of anticipatory response, 
is  not  necessarily 
where  a  beginning  of  action 
completed”.  Positive 
to 
favourable inclinations & feelings, absence of prejudice 
or bias towards the learners. It is an obviously subjective 
and personal affair. How a teacher performs his duty, as a 
teacher  is  dependent  to  a  great  extent  on  his/her 
attitudes, values and beliefs. 

refers 

A teacher's positive teaching attitude can also be referred 
as a readiness to act favourably or beneficially towards or 
against  some  situation, 
learner's  colleagues  or 
managerial bodies. It requires an enduring organization 
of  motivational,  emotional,  perceptual  &  cognitive 
process with respect to some aspect of the individual's 
words (Oliver 1968).

A  positive  or  favourable  teaching  attitude  makes  the 
teaching work not only easier, but also more satisfying and 
professionally  rewarding.  Teachers  with  positive  attitude 
towards their profession are generally successful, properly 
adjusted and well satisfied with their work.

Positive Teaching attitude and Emotional Intelligence 

Teacher's attitude not only affects the learner's behaviour 
in  the  school,  but  influences  his  emotional  and  social 
aspects  also.  Moreover,  effective  and  productive 
learning  on  the  part  of  the  pupil  can  be  achieved  by 
employing teachers with desirable attitudes by shaping 
their attitude in the desired direction. 

Teaching  attitude  lays  a  foundation  stone  for  social, 
emotional  and  intellectual  potentialities  of  the  learners 
and  hence  it  is  imperative  to  assess  the  emotional 
intelligence  and  teaching  attitude  of  B.Ed.  trainee 
teachers  as  they  are  future  teachers  who  mould  and 
prepare the destinies of the nation. 

According to Ediger (1997), the emotional feelings and 
values are vital for a person's well being and achievement 
in life. He also stressed that teachers should be stressed on 
the  affective  domain  while  teaching,  because  the 
affective  domain  cannot  be  separated 
the 
cognitive domain, and qualitative emotions and feelings 

from 

help  students  to  give  their  rest  of  the  potential  in  the 
classroom. Positive teaching attitude creates a positive 
learning atmosphere and the students who are aversive 
and think negatively cannot concentrate for a long time 
and have more difficulty in reaching their potentials than 
their counterparts. 

Purpose and Rationale of the Research

‘We cannot prepare the future of our youth but we can 
certainly prepare our youth for the future’. In the present 
circumstances,  psychosomatic  problems  such  as 
anxiety,  tension  and  frustration  are  common  among 
youth and children. 

By  understanding  emotions  of  self  and  others,  we  can 
channelize the emotions in a proper direction that can 
serve  as  a  remedy  to  such  problems.  Emotional 
Intelligence is now emerging as a descriptive science as 
compared with anatomy. Jersild rightly pointed out that 
emotions dominate our lives which otherwise could be 
dull. They are the basic stuff out of which all motivation 
arises. 

Emotions not only impel us to action, but often serve as 
goals  of  action  seeking  pleasant  ends  and  avoiding 
unpleasing ends which sums to arise from emotion. 

It is a staunch faith of the researcher that the study would 
reveal significant trends as to the degree and extent of 
predictability  and 
relationship  between  Emotional 
Intelligence  and  teaching  attitude.  Such  a  trend  will 
motivate the educators and curriculum framers to design 
academic as well as other activities in a way that those will 
help  to  develop  an  ability  in  the  students  to  face  the 
challenges  of  life  right  from  school.  The  knowledge  of 
emotional  intelligence  will  incline  the  teachers  by 
understanding, regulating and managing self and other's 
emotions. 

Significance of the Study

Children who are in the elastic period of their life are easily 
influenced by their teachers. Whether, a teachers’ attitude 
is good or bad trickles down to the students, (Vail, 2005). 
The teachers' ability to deal with emotional problems is a 
powerful  factor  in  moulding  the  minds.  Emotionally. 
intelligent teachers can produce emotionally intelligent 

44

i-manager’s Journal o

n Educational

 Psychology, Vol.

 8

   No. 3 l

 November 2014 - January 2015

l

RESEARCH PAPERS

citizens. A teacher who is able to carry out reasoning with 
regard  to  emotions  and  uses  emotions  to  enhance 
reasoning  will  succeed  in  developing  the  emotional 
intelligence of pupils. An emotionally competent teacher 
is a heart and soul of any educational programme. As the 
student  teachers  are  at  the  threshold  of  entering  the 
career  of  teaching,  it  is  highly  desirable  that  they 
understand their levels of EI (Emotional Inteligence), which 
will  play  a  vital  role  in  their  survival  and  fitness  in  the 
profession.  

Review of Related Literature 

(1991),  studied 

intelligence,  attitude 

Budhisagar,  Meena  S.D.N 
the 
achievement of B.Ed. students to determine the effect of 
teaching 
treatment, 
found 
profession  and 
interaction  and 
that 
Intelligence  significantly  affected 
the  overall 
achievement  of  the  students  whereas  attitude  towards 
the teaching did not.

towards 

their 

(1992),  conducted  a  study  on  some 
Kukreti  B.R. 
psychological  correlates  of  successful  teachers  and 
found  that  (i)  Significant  positive  correlation  was  found 
between the teaching success & teaching aptitude. (ii)   
Successful  teachers  scored  significantly  higher  mean 
scores on intelligence as compared to their unsuccessful 
counterparts.  (iii)    Knowledge  &  Creative  Values  were 
remarkably higher among successful teachers. (iv)  In the 
case of intellectual self concept, character self concept 
&  total  self  concept,  the  successful  teachers  scored 
significantly  higher  mean  values  than  the  unsuccessful 
teachers. 

Ramchandran G. (1991) conducted an enquiry into the 
attitude of student teachers towards teaching and found 
that  (i)  Regular  teachers  have  more  favorable  attitude 
towards  teaching  than  the  correspondence  course 
teacher trainees (ii) Female trainee teachers had a more 
favorable  attitude  towards  teaching  than  male  trainee 
teachers.

Indu  H.,  (2006).  Conducted  a  research  on  Emotional 
Intelligence of secondary teacher trainees in relation to 
gender and type of family and the type of institution. Her 
study revealed that, no significant difference was found 

with  respect  to  gender,  type  of  institution  and  type  of 
family.

Singaravelu S, (2007), Studied Emotional Intelligence of 
student  teachers  at  primary  level  and  found  that, 
emotional  intelligence  of  student  teachers  at  primary 
level  is  high.  Inspirational  subjects  like  arts,  literature, 
poetry and music help in developing the appreciation of 
the beautiful and sublime emotion in life. 

Romould, E. V. (2006). Enhancing emotional intelligence 
of  student's  teachers  through  Enneagram  educational 
program. The objectives of the study were: to assess the 
effectiveness  of 
the  Enneagram  educational 
programme on the following competencies of emotional 
intelligence  of  student  teachers;  (a)  emotional  self-
awareness,  (b)  emotional  expression,  (c)  emotional 
awareness of others, (d) creativity, and (e) interpersonal 
connections. 

The findings were, 

The Enneagram, spiritual and psychological model of 
(I)
humanity, enables individuals to look deeply into their own 
character,  harmonize 
their 
relationships,  both  personal  and  professional  and 
understand their personal path of growth. 

their  daily 

lives  and 

(ii) Working  with  the  Enneagram,  with  oneself  and  with 
students,  teachers  have  found  it  more  creative  to 
recognize their passion, put their attention to it, learn to 
observe it and see what it teaches one about oneself.

(iii) This process itself loosens the grip of the automatic 
response and gives insight into how to work with the issues, 
especially the repeated behavior and emotions.

(iv)  The knowledge and training in Enneagram enables 
the individuals to improve their emotional self-awareness, 
emotional  expression,  and  emotional  awareness  of 
others, creativity and interpersonal connections.

(v) Practicing  Enneagram  knowledge  in  the  classroom 
enables  the  teachers  to  improve  their  patterns  of 
communication, their interpersonal relationships, integrity, 
and 
facilitative  and 
conducive classroom climate.

to  develop  and  maintain  a 

(vi)
particularly 

It  can  be  concluded  that  the  field  of  education, 
is  a 

training  programme 

teachers 

the 

i-manager’s Journal o

n Educational

 Psychology, Vol.

 8

   No. 3 l

 November 2014 - January 2015

l

45

RESEARCH PAPERS

beneficiary programme.

of B.Ed. trainees.

Santwana  G.  Mishra  (2007),  studied  teaching  Attitude 
Score  as  a  Criterion  for  Admission  in  Colleges  of 
Education.  The  study  was  essentially  a  survey,  and  the 
instrument  of  data  collection  was  the  Teacher  Attitude 
Inventory (TAI) by Ahluwalia. For this study, the researcher 
had selected 94 teacher trainees of colleges affiliated to 
Dr.  Babasaheb  Ambedkar  Marathwada  University, 
Aurangabad. 

The finding of the study reveals,

(i) A  strong  linear  relationship  exists  between  the  TAI 
score with Academic score and CET (Commom Entrance 
Test) score of the trainee teachers, as the coefficient of 
correlation was 0.664 

(ii)
There is negative correlation between TAI score and 
academic score. Attitude score has no relationship with 
the gender (Male/Female), qualification (Graduation/Post 
graduation) and geographical location (Urban/Rural) of 
trainee teachers. 

Objectives of the Study
·To  Study  the  Teaching  Attitude  of  B.Ed.  Trainees  in 

Aurangabad City.

·To Study the Emotional Intelligence of B.Ed. Trainees in 

Aurangabad City.

·To Study the relationship between positive Teaching 
Attitude & Emotional intelligence of B.Ed. Trainees in 
Aurangabad City.

·To Study the difference between the positive teaching 
in 

female  B.Ed.  Trainees 

attitude  of  male  & 
Aurangabad City. 

·To  Study  the  difference  between  the  emotional 
in 

trainees 

female 

intelligence  of  male  & 
Aurangabad City.

Hypothesis
·The  teaching  attitude  of  B.Ed.  Trainees  is  highly 

positive. 

·The level of emotional intelligence of B.Ed. Trainees is 

high.

·There  is  positive  and  high  relationship  between 
positive teaching attitude and emotional intelligence 

·There  is  no  significant  difference  between  the 

teaching attitude of male and female B.Ed. trainees.

·There  is  no  significant  difference  between  the 
emotional  intelligence  of  male  and  female  B.Ed. 
trainees.

Limitation

Aurangabad City is a vast and developed city. There are 
number  of  B.Ed.  Training  colleges  in  Aurangabad. 
Keeping in view the time factor and resources available, 
the present study will be delimited to the following.
·The present study will be delimited to B.Ed. students 

only.

·The  present  study  will  be  delimited  to  Aurangabad 

City.

Methodology of the study

Population

All the students of B.Ed. College of Aurangabad City are 
the population.

Sample

There are 10 colleges of B.Ed. training, and their intake is 
almost  1200.  Among  them  5  colleges  are  selected  & 
from  each  college  25  male  students  &  25  female 
students  are  randomly  selected.  From  Marathwada 
College of Education, Aurangabad, 50 male & 50 female 
students  are  selected  as  it  is  a  big  college  &  has  330 
intakes. 

Method

Survey  method  was  conducted  by  the  researchers  to 
collect relevant data regarding the research topic.

Tools
·For  measuring  Teaching  Attitude  of  B.Ed.  Trainees 
'Teaching Attitude' scale prepared by Dr. S.P. Ahluwalia 
was used.

Range

0  – 120

120  – 240

Interpretation

Poor Positive Attitude

Moderate Positive attitude

240  – 360
Table 1. Description of Teaching Attitude score &

High Positive Attitude

 its interpretation 

46

i-manager’s Journal o

n Educational

 Psychology, Vol.

 8

   No. 3 l

 November 2014 - January 2015

l

RESEARCH PAPERS

·For  measuring  Emotional 

Intelligence  of  B.Ed. 
Trainees, 
Intelligence  Test’ 
prepared  by  Prof.  Roquiya  &  Zainuddin  &  Anjum 
Ahmed was used. 

'Roqan  Emotional 

Analysis & Interpretation of Data

Table 1 shows the description of Teaching Attitude Score 
and its interpretation. 0-120 as a score of an individual 
shows that a person is having a poor positive attitude. The 
score  between  120-240  shows  that,  the  individual  is 
having  a  moderate  positive  attitude  and  the  score 
between  240-360  shows  that  a  person  is  having  high 
positive attitude.

Table 2 depicts the description of emotional intelligence 
score  and  its  interpretation.  The  range  is  prepared 
arbitrary. The range 64 and below shows that an individual 
is having a low emotional intelligence. The range of 65-75 
depicts  that  an  individual  is  having  normal  emotional 
intelligence and the score range of 76 and above shows 
high emotionally intelligent individual.

Table  3  shows  the  Mean  of  Teaching  attitude  score  & 
emotional  Intelligence  score  of  different  Groups.  The 

Range

Interpretation

64 and Below
65  – 75
76 and Above
Table 2. Table showing the description of Emotional 

Normal Range

High Range

Low Range

Intelligence score & its   interpretation

Group
All B.Ed. Trainee

All B.Ed. Trainee

Variable
Teaching Attitude 

Emotional Intelligence

Mean Score 

213.3

66.9

Table 3. Table showing the Mean of Teaching attitude 
score & emotional Intelligence score of different Groups

Coefficent of 
Correlation

r = 0.44

Description

Positive & Moderate

Table 4. Table showing the coefficient of Correlation 

between T.A. & E.I. of B.Ed. Trainees 

Sr. 
No.
1

2
3
4

Group

Variable N

M S.D.

t 

value

d.f.

Table 
Value

Sig. /Insig.

Male B.Ed. 
Trainees

Female B.Ed.
Male B.Ed.
Female B.Ed.

T.A.

E.I.

150 205.7 52.0

150 221.1 54.6
150 66.1 9.8
150 67.6 8.7

2.5

298 1.97

Significant

1.41 298 1.97

Insignificant

Table 5. Table showing the Mean, N, S.D., t value 

and its significance or Insignificance

mean  score  of  Teaching  Attitude  of  all  the  student 
teachers  is  found  to  be  213.3  and  that  of  Emotional 
Intelligence is 66.9.

Table  4  shows  the  coefficient  of  Correlation  between 
Teaching  Attitude  &  Emotional 
Intelligence  of 
B.Ed.Trainees. The co-efficient of correlation is found to be 
0.44 which is moderate though positive.

Table 5 shows the Mean, S.D., and t-value. It reveals that t-
value of the scores of teaching attitude of male & female 
B.Ed. trainees in Aurangabad City is 2.5 which is greater 
than  table  value  at  0.05  level  of  confidence.  The 
difference in the scores of the teaching attitude of male & 
female B.Ed. trainees is significant where as the t-value of 
the scores of emotional intelligence of male & female 
B.Ed. trainees in Aurangabad City is  1.41 which is smaller 
than  table  value  at  0.05  level  of  confidence.  The 
difference in the scores of the emotional intelligence of 
male and female B.Ed. trainees is insignificant.

Findings

Table  3  reveals  that  the  mean  score  of  the  teaching 
attitude  of  B.Ed.  trainees  of  Aurangabad  City  is  213.3. 
Hence the hypothesis is rejected. The teaching attitude of 
B.Ed. trainees is positive but moderate.

Table  3  reveals  that  the  mean  score  of  emotional 
intelligence of B.Ed. Trainees of Aurangabad City is 66.9. 
Hence the hypothesis is rejected. The level of Emotional 
Intelligence comes under the normal range. 

Table 4 reveals that Co-efficient of Correlation between 
the  scores  of  positive  teaching  attitude  &  emotional 
intelligence of B.Ed. trainees in Aurangabad City is 0.44. 
Hence  the  hypothesis  is  rejected.  The  relationship 
between  positive 
teaching  attitude  &  emotional 
intelligence of B.Ed. trainees is positive and moderate.

Table  5  reveals  that  t-value  of  the  scores  of  teaching 
attitude of male & female B.Ed. trainees in Aurangabad 
City is 2.5 which is greater than table value at 0.05 level of 
confidence. The difference in the scores of the teaching 
attitude of male & female B.Ed. trainees is significant and 
hence null hypothesis is rejected.

Table  5  reveals  that  t-value  of  the  scores  of  emotional 
intelligence  of  male  & 
in 

female  B.Ed. 

trainees 

i-manager’s Journal o

n Educational

 Psychology, Vol.

 8

   No. 3 l

 November 2014 - January 2015

l

47

RESEARCH PAPERS

Aurangabad city is 1.41 which is smaller than table value 
at 0.05 level of confidence. The difference in the scores of 
the  emotional  intelligence  of  male  and  female  B.Ed. 
trainees  is  insignificant  and  hence  null  hypothesis  is 
accepted.

Conclusions

The  teaching  attitude  of  B.Ed.  trainees  is  positive  and 
moderate. The level of Emotional Intelligence of all B.Ed. 
trainees comes under the normal range. The relationship 
between  positive 
teaching  attitude  &  emotional 
intelligence of B.Ed. trainees is positive and moderate. The 
difference in the scores of the teaching attitude of male & 
female B.Ed. trainees is found to be significant while the 
difference in the scores of the emotional intelligence is 
found to be   insignificant.

References

[1].  Amrita,  M.,  Kadhiravan  S.,  (2006).  Influence  of 
personality  on  the  Emotional  Intelligence  of  teachers, 
Edutracks, Vol. (8), No. (3), pp 25-27.

[2].  Budhisagar,  Meena  S.D.,  (1991),  Achievement  of 
B.Ed. students: Effect of treatment, intelligence, attitude 
towards  teaching  profession  and  their  interaction. 
Retrieved  from  http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in:8080/ 
jspui/bitstream/10603/9840/9/09_chapter%202.pdf.

[4]. Kukreti, B.R. (1992), “A study on some psychological 
correlates  of  successful 
from 
(http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/8345
/9/09_chapter%202.pdf)

teachers”,  Retrieved 

[5]. Oliver, RAC and Butcher (1968). “Teacher Attitude of 
Education”, Journal of Education and Psychology, Vol. 38, 
Pp  364.  Retrieved  from  http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com 
/doi/10.1111/j.2044-8279.1968.tb01979.x/abstract

[6]. Ramchandran G. (1991), “An enquiry into the attitude 
of  student  teachers  towards  teaching.”Retrieved  from 
(http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/bitstream/10603/8345
/9/09_chapter%202.pdf)

[7].  Romould,  E.  V.  (2006).  “Enhancing  emotional 
intelligence  of  student's  teachers  through  Enneagram 
educational programme”. Educational Tracks, Vol. 6, No. 
3.

[8]. Santwana G. Mishra (2007), “Teaching Attitude Score 
as  a  Criterion  for  Admission  in  Colleges  of  Education. 
Retrieved 
(http://shodhganga.inflibnet.ac.in/ 
bitstream/10603/8345/9/09_chapter%202.pdf)

from 

[9].  Singaravelu  S.  (2007),  “Emotional  Intelligence  of 
teacher 
Student 
in 
Pondicherry”,  All 
for  Educational 
Research, Vol. 19, No. 3/4.

(Pre  service)  at  primary 
India  Association 

level 

[3]. Dr. Indu, (2006), Emotional Intelligence of Secondary 
Teacher Trainees, Edutracks, Vol. (8), No. (9).

[10].  Mary,  K.,  (2002),  Emotions  -  How  To  Understand, 
Identify  Release  Your  Emotions.  Retrieved 
from 

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Farhatunnisa Begum is currently working as an Assistant Lecturer in the College of Education with fourteen years of academic 
experience, with seven years of academic experience in various schools of Aurangabad City, and seven years of experience in 
College of Education. She has taught Science and Math in different schools in higher classes and Psychology, Educational 
technology, Research Methodology and Statistics in College of Education. She has published research papers in International 
and National referred Journals and attended workshops, National and International seminars and Conferences.

Dr. Suhail Ahmed Khan is currently working as a Principal in the Marathwada College of Education, Aurangabad, Maharashtra. 
He has completed M.Sc., M.Ed., Ph.D. (Education). He has completed 10 research project of State Resources Centre (SRC) in 
Adult Education, Aurangabad. He has published more than five textbooks and has published research papers in different 
National and International Research Journals. His research interests are in the areas of Educational Research and Statistics, 
Educational  Evaluation  and  Measurement  Methodology  of  Teaching  Mathematics  and  Educational  Technology  and 
Management.

48

i-manager’s Journal o

n Educational

 Psychology, Vol.

 8

   No. 3 l

 November 2014 - January 2015

l

