file-1
ABSTRACT 
When  search  results  against  digital  libraries  and  web  resources 
have  limited  metadata,  augmenting  them  with  meaningful  and 
stable  category  information  can  enable  better  overviews  and 
support  user  exploration.  This  paper  proposes  six  “fast-feature” 
techniques that use only features available in the search result list, 
such  as  title,  snippet,  and  URL,  to  categorize  results  into 
meaningful  categories.  They  use  credible  knowledge  resources, 
including  a  US  government  organizational  hierarchy,  a thematic 
hierarchy from the Open Directory Project (ODP) web directory, 
and personal browse histories, to add valuable metadata to search 
results.  In  three  tests  the  percent  of  results  categorized  for  five 
representative  queries  was  high  enough  to  suggest  practical 
benefits:  general  web  search  (76-90%),  government  web  search 
(39-100%), and the Bureau of Labor Statistics website (48-94%). 
An additional test submitted 250 TREC queries to a search engine 
and successfully categorized 66% of the top 100 using the ODP 
and  61%  of  the  top  350.  Fast-feature  techniques  have  been 
implemented in a prototype search engine. We propose research 
directions  to  improve  categorization  rates  and  make  suggestions 
about  how  web  site  designers  could  re-organize  their  sites  to 
support fast categorization of search results.   


file-2
Abstract
The present paper concentrates on the issue of feature selection for unsuper-
vised word sense disambiguation (WSD) performed with an underlying Naïve Bayes model.
It introduces web N-gram features which, to our knowledge, are used for the ﬁrst time in
unsupervised WSD. While creating features from unlabeled data, we are “helping” a simple,
basic knowledge-lean disambiguation algorithm to significantly increase its accuracy as a
result of receiving easily obtainable knowledge. The performance of this method is com-
pared to that of others that rely on completely different feature sets. Test results concerning
nouns, adjectives and verbs show that web N-gram feature selection is a reliable alternative
to previously existing approaches, provided that a “quality list” of features, adapted to the
part of speech, is used.


file-3
ABSTRACT
Translational control is crucial in the regulation of
gene expression and deregulation of translation is
associated with a wide range of cancers and hu-
man diseases. Ribosome proﬁling is a technique
that provides genome wide information of mRNA in
translation based on deep sequencing of ribosome
protected mRNA fragments (RPF). RPFdb is a com-
prehensive resource for hosting, analyzing and vi-
sualizing RPF data, available at www.rpfdb.org or
http://sysbio.sysu.edu.cn/rpfdb/index.html. The cur-
rent version of database contains 777 samples from
82 studies in 8 species, processed and reanalyzed by
a uniﬁed pipeline. There are two ways to query the
database: by keywords of studies or by genes. The
outputs are presented in three levels. (i) Study level:
including meta information of studies and repro-
cessed data for gene expression of translated mR-
NAs; (ii) Sample level: including global perspective
of translated mRNA and a list of the most translated
mRNA of each sample from a study; (iii) Gene level:
including normalized sequence counts of translated
mRNA on different genomic location of a gene from
multiple samples and studies. To explore rich in-
formation provided by RPF, RPFdb also provides
a genome browser to query and visualize context-
speciﬁc translated mRNA. Overall our database pro-
vides a simple way to search, analyze, compare, vi-
sualize and download RPF data sets.


